# SOURCE: https://bulkheadtau.com/bulkhead-tau/reflect/operator-control-plane.html
# captured 2026-09-21, text extracted from the live page

Operator Control Plane — Owner's Manual 

 Operator Control Plane — Owner's Manual

 Visual package (live ledger orientation, not a Reflect rescan):

 Project board 

 Issue catalog 

 Project map 

 Open a task card on the project board for that task’s resolution ledger (claim → evidence → review → verifier → handoff).

 Visual package 

 Owner’s Manual
for blue-az/operator-control-plane 

 What this manual does not
establish 

 Quickstart 

 What Operator Control Plane
Is 

 Running the Core Ledger
Workflow 

 Governing the Ledger
and Evidence Record 

 When to Use Enrolled
Authority Mode 

 Operating Safely and
Recovering Cleanly 

 Harnesses, Delegation, and
Study Work 

 Entry Checks 

 Phase States and Control 

 Approval, Pause, Resume 

 Checkpointed Replay 

 Local
Comparison 

 Worked
example 

 Command
reference 

 Configuration 

 Appendix —
Attention Items and Owner Decisions 

 Owner’s Manual
for blue-az/operator-control-plane

 Generated from a Reflect scan of
 blue-az/operator-control-plane-v2:main@7968d1a , an archive
snapshot of the product tree at
 blue-az/operator-control-plane@cab4a7a with the benchmark
corpus removed. The chapters are Reflect’s. The quickstart, worked
example, command reference, configuration notes and appendix are from
the repository and edited by hand.

 Attention items and owner decisions are deduplicated into the
appendix rather than interleaved. Two scans of the same tree produced
two differently worded card sets; the appendix states their union
once.

 What this manual does not
establish

 It is written from a static read of the source tree at the pin above.
Three things it describes but does not demonstrate.

 Runtime compatibility with external harness
binaries. Twelve harness profiles are seeded at
 operator init and listed in the command reference. That
they are cataloged is a fact about the source. That each provider’s CLI
still behaves as this product expects is not shown here.

 Live host behaviour for enrolled authority. 
Provisioning, service enablement and rollback safety on the broker path
were not exercised against a real host. A checkout is not a production
install.

 Backup and migration guarantees beyond the append-only
model. The durable history and its projections are described.
Whether a particular backup or migration procedure restores a running
system is an operational question this document does not answer.

 Two limits the scans raised are answered rather than open. Product
intent was listed as unconfirmed; publishing this manual confirms it.
Whether this repository is the whole system or one part of a larger one
was listed as unknown; it is a standalone, domain-neutral control plane,
developed alongside Bulkhead Tau but not importing, invoking or
requiring it.

 Quickstart

 pip install -r requirements.txt # runtime: just PyYAML 
 pip install -r requirements-dev.txt # tests/lint: pytest, ruff, black, isort 
 ./operator --help 

 mkdir /tmp/operator-demo && cd /tmp/operator-demo # init writes into the current directory 
 /path/to/operator init # create a .operator/ ledger here 
 /path/to/operator doctor # consistency check -> "All records consistent." 

 Run the tests from the repo:

 python3 -m pytest tests/test_operator.py -q # repo CLI, ledger layout, identity, doctor, usage 
 python3 -m pytest tests/ -q # everything (some suites need a Linux host) 

 The ledger ( .operator/ ) is gitignored — it’s your work
history, not the tool. Its durable local event history is stored in
 .operator/ledger.sqlite3 .

 What Operator Control Plane
Is

 Operator Control Plane is a local-first control plane for AI
coding work. Its center of gravity is a repository-local ledger that
records claims, evidence, verification, and the doctor audit trail. That
makes the product a trust record for work, not a generic workspace or
hosted service. The roles are distinct. A builder creates claims and
drafts evidence. A verifier establishes trusted sign-off. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 Operator Control Plane is a local-first control plane for AI coding
work. Its center of gravity is a repository-local ledger that records
claims, evidence, verification, and the doctor audit trail. That makes
the product a trust record for work, not a generic workspace or hosted
service.

 The roles are distinct. A builder creates claims and drafts evidence.
A verifier establishes trusted sign-off. An administrator handles the
enrolled authority boundary and its host prerequisites. A harness can
run delegated or study work, but it is not a trust authority. The owner
is the person reading this manual and deciding what the product should
promise.

 The product also has a layered boundary. The everyday path stays
local. The enrolled authority path is optional and consequential. Later
chapters separate the core workflow, the ledger lifecycle, the authority
choice, recovery, and harness work instead of blending them into one
story.

 Mental Model

 Operator Control Plane is a local-first control plane for AI coding
work. Its center of gravity is a repository-local ledger that records
claims, evidence, verification, and the doctor audit trail. That makes
the product a trust record for work, not a generic workspace or hosted
service.

 The roles are distinct. A builder creates claims and drafts evidence.
A verifier establishes trusted sign-off. An administrator handles the
enrolled authority boundary and its host prerequisites. A harness can
run delegated or study work, but it is not a trust authority. The owner
is the person reading this manual and deciding what the product should
promise.

 The native terms matter because they mark different kinds of risk. A
claim is the statement tied to a task. Evidence is the retained proof
attached to that claim. Verification is the trusted status. Doctor is
the read-only audit. UID-isolated metadata is part of the trust check
when identity matters.

 Figure: The owner should read the repository-local
ledger as the default path for ordinary work, with enrolled authority,
root-only administration, and read-only snapshots kept on separate
paths. That separation means the product is not one generic control
surface.

 flowchart TD
 local[Repository-local ledger]
 work[Everyday local work]
 enrolled[Enrolled authority path]
 admin[Root-only administration]
 read[Read-only snapshot path]
 work --> local
 local -. optional .-> enrolled
 enrolled --> admin
 local -. separate read path .-> read 

 The diagram shows everyday work flowing into the repository-local
ledger first. From that local center, one separate path leads to
enrolled authority, another to root-only administration, and another to
read-only snapshots. The consequence is that ordinary use should be
treated as the default trust boundary, while privileged and
inspection-only paths stay distinct.

 How It Works

 By default, the product stays local. The Operator command line
creates draft claims, keeps a verification command beside them, and
stores evidence as retained snapshots in the repository-local ledger
area. That is the everyday loop.

 If the repository is enrolled, ordinary commit requests are
role-gated and the broker becomes the authority boundary. Root-only
enrollment and rebind actions sit in a separate administrator surface.
Read-only snapshot requests are handled separately from mutating
commits, so inspection and mutation do not share the same trust
path.

 Later chapters take the pieces apart one by one: the core workflow
chapter covers the day-to-day loop, the ledger lifecycle chapter covers
stored history and evidence governance, the authority chapter covers the
local-versus-enrolled choice, the operations chapter covers recovery and
host prerequisites, and the harness chapter covers delegation, studies,
and usage accounting.

 Verified Facts

 The local claim path writes a draft record with verification still
false, and evidence attachment copies local files into retained
snapshots.

 Doctor fails closed on verified records when evidence references,
the verification command, self-verification, or UID-isolated metadata
are missing or malformed. Draft records surface the same issues as
warnings or infos, and warning-only runs still exit cleanly.

 Ordinary broker commits are builder- or verifier-gated. Root-only
enrollment and rebind are separate requests, and the administrator
surface itself requires root and host preflight.

 The broker’s read-only snapshot path is separate from commit
handling, and reconciliation does not silently adopt a replaced store.
It needs explicit acknowledgement before it resets and retries prepared
work.

 The public navigation still places the local loop first, with
enrolled authority and secondary command families following behind
it.

 Strengths

 The structure protects the owner in four ways: - It keeps the
everyday trust boundary close to the repository, which makes claims and
evidence easier to reason about. - It separates read-only inspection
from mutating commit paths. - It keeps recovery explicit instead of
silent, which lowers the risk of accidentally inheriting the wrong store
state. - It keeps study and dogfood workflows in their own lane instead
of letting them define the product’s main identity.

 Running the Core Ledger
Workflow

 This chapter is the product’s trust loop. A builder turns work
into a claim, attaches evidence, and a separate verifier turns that
claim into trusted state. Doctor is the continuing check on that trust,
not a repair tool. The owner needs to notice one sharp edge: closeout
can be reopened if a later verifier write negates the transition
claim. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter is the product’s trust loop. A builder turns work into a
claim, attaches evidence, and a separate verifier turns that claim into
trusted state. Doctor is the continuing check on that trust, not a
repair tool. The owner needs to notice one sharp edge: closeout can be
reopened if a later verifier write negates the transition claim. In
enrolled mode, the ordinary builder and verifier path stays separate
from root-only authority changes.

 Mental Model

 Think of the core loop as a trust ladder. A task starts as work. A
builder turns that work into a claim and attaches evidence. A verifier
is a different role that can turn the claim into a trusted record.
Doctor keeps checking whether the record still fits the rules.

 The key owner rule is that narration and trust are separate. A claim
can exist before it is trusted, but verified records are held to
stricter checks than drafts. That split lets the product keep work
flexible without pretending it is already authoritative.

 Figure: The owner should read this as a handoff, not
a blur: work is not trusted until it passes from builder output into
verifier judgment, and doctor keeps checking the result afterward.

 flowchart TD
 W[Work] --> B[Builder]
 B --> C[Draft claim]
 B --> E[Evidence]
 C --> V[Verifier]
 E --> V
 V --> T[Trusted record]
 T --> D[Doctor]
 D --> T 

 Work flows to the builder, which produces a draft claim and evidence.
Those feed the verifier, which can produce a trusted record. Doctor then
checks the trusted record and keeps feeding its result back as an
ongoing audit rather than becoming the step that creates trust.

 How It Works

 In the default local path, the builder creates a draft claim and
evidence stays in the local ledger. That is the everyday owner boundary
for repo-local work.

 When the repository is enrolled, the ordinary path splits builder and
verifier duties cleanly. Builders create claims and attach draft
evidence, verifiers attach status, and task transitions to verified or
complete only happen when the claimed task state and uid-isolated checks
still line up. Root-only enrollment and repository rebind are separate
privileged steps, not part of the normal loop.

 Doctor is read-only. On verified records it fails closed for missing
evidence, missing verification command, self-verification, and malformed
uid-isolated metadata. On draft records the same findings stay advisory,
so a warning does not mean the trust boundary itself has failed.

 Closeout sits after verification, but it is not a permanent
guarantee. A later negative verifier write on the transition claim can
reopen the task and clear the closeout state. Any replay or resumable
work belongs to the later study and recovery chapters, not to the core
daily loop.

 Figure: The daily loop is only one trust path.
Keeping enrollment, rebind, and read-only snapshots separate prevents
owner readers from treating privileged authority changes or inspections
as ordinary workflow.

 flowchart LR
 subgraph D[Daily loop]
 B[Builder work] --> C[Claims and evidence] --> V[Verification] --> T[Trusted record]
 end
 subgraph P[Separate paths]
 R[Root-only enrollment and rebind]
 S[Read-only snapshots]
 end
 R -. separate trust path .-> T
 S -. separate trust path .-> T 

 The diagram separates the daily builder/verifier loop from two other
paths. Ordinary work goes through claims, evidence, and verification
into a trusted record. Root-only enrollment and rebind stay in a
separate privileged path, and read-only snapshots stay on their own
path. The consequence is that the owner should not treat privileged
authority changes or inspection views as part of normal workflow.

 Verified Facts

 The local path writes a draft claim with verification marked false
and keeps the intended verification command separate from the claim
itself.

 Evidence attachment in the local path keeps a retained, hashed
snapshot instead of treating a bare status write as enough.

 Doctor is not a repair tool. It is an audit that returns a failure
only when issues exist, and warnings alone do not make the run fail.

 In enrolled mode, ordinary builder and verifier actions are
role-separated, while root-only enrollment and rebind are separate
privileged requests.

 A negative verifier write can reopen a task that had already been
closed.

 The command surface is intentionally split so the core loop is shown
first and study, dogfood, and admin work stay secondary.

 Figure: Draft output can warn about the same
problems that would block a verified record, but only verified records
are enforced. That means a warning on a draft is not proof that the
trust boundary failed.

 flowchart LR
 P[Same problem]
 P --> D[Draft claim]
 P --> V[Verified record]
 D --> A[Warning or info]
 V --> B[Blocking failure] 

 One branch shows a draft claim: if it has missing evidence or trust
details, doctor reports a warning or info. The other branch shows a
verified record: the same kind of problem becomes a blocking failure.
The consequence is that warning-only draft output should be read as
advisory, not as a broken trust boundary.

 Figure: A closed task is only closed while its
transition claim remains verified. If a later negative verifier write
lands, the closeout is withdrawn and the task can open again.

 stateDiagram-v2
 [*] --> InProgress
 InProgress --> Closed : verifier marks it done
 Closed --> InProgress : later negative verifier write
 InProgress --> Closed : verifier marks it done again 

 The lifecycle starts with work in progress. When verification
succeeds, the task moves to closed. If a later negative verifier write
arrives on the transition claim, the task moves back to in progress and
closeout clears. The consequence is that closeout is provisional rather
than permanently final.

 Strengths

 The product makes trust transitions visible instead of hiding them.
The owner can distinguish a draft claim from a verified record and see
when evidence is still only backing, not trust.

 Builder and verifier responsibilities are separated before trusted
state is changed. That makes the handoff easier to reason about and
reduces the chance that one role quietly acts as the other.

 Doctor keeps checking consistency after the fact instead of acting
like a one-time acceptance step. That gives the owner a continuing
signal when the record no longer matches the rules.

 The manual and command surface both lead with the core local loop
first. That matches the product’s owner-facing shape and keeps secondary
tooling from crowding out the real daily path.

 Governing the Ledger
and Evidence Record

 The ledger is the product’s memory: it decides what work exists,
which evidence supports it, and what can be trusted later. In the local
path, claim creation and evidence attachment build a retained record
first; in enrolled mode, the broker and administrator surfaces separate
ordinary mutations from privileged enrollment and rebind
actions. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 The ledger is the product’s memory: it decides what work exists,
which evidence supports it, and what can be trusted later. In the local
path, claim creation and evidence attachment build a retained record
first; in enrolled mode, the broker and administrator surfaces separate
ordinary mutations from privileged enrollment and rebind actions.
Compatibility views help the product read and reconcile state, but they
are not the same thing as the durable history.

 For the owner, the important question is not just where data lives,
but which record is canonical, which parts can be rebuilt, and which
lifecycle choices can reopen or wedge work. That matters for
auditability, recovery, backup, and migration decisions.

 Mental Model

 Think of the ledger as the governed record of work. It is where the
product decides what happened, what evidence supports it, and what can
be trusted later. The durable history is the part the owner should rely
on for audit and recovery. Compatibility projections help the product
read or reconcile that history, but they are not the same thing as the
history itself.

 Evidence attachments matter because they are provenance, not just
storage. A claim can exist as a draft, but a draft does not carry the
same trust weight as a verified claim. That distinction shapes
auditability, reconciliation, and every recovery decision that depends
on rebuilding confidence from local records.

 Figure: The owner should treat the append-only
history as the record that must survive restore and audit work. The
other surfaces help the product read or rebuild state, but they cannot
stand in for the durable record when recovery or evidence review
matters.

 flowchart LR
 A[Append-only ledger] --> B[Canonical history]
 A --> C[Compatibility read surface]
 A --> D[Read-only snapshot]
 B --> E[Restore and audit]
 C --> E
 D --> E 

 The diagram shows one append-only ledger feeding three outcomes: the
canonical history, a compatibility read surface, and a read-only
snapshot. Only the canonical history is the durable record. The other
surfaces can be rebuilt or reread, so backup and restore planning has to
protect the history rather than only the convenient read surfaces.

 How It Works

 Locally, claim creation writes a draft record with explicit
verification metadata, and evidence attachment stores a retained, hashed
snapshot in the repository-local ledger. The audit step then treats
verified records more strictly than drafts: verified items fail closed
on missing evidence, missing verification command, self-verification, or
malformed trusted-identity metadata, while drafts surface the same
problems only as warnings or infos.

 When the repository is enrolled, the trust boundary moves to the
broker. Ordinary commits remain role-gated: builders create claims and
attach draft evidence, verifiers attach status, and root-only enrollment
or rebind sits outside that ordinary matrix. Read-only snapshots are
handled separately from mutating requests, the broker ties requests to
the connecting peer’s operating-system identity, and privileged
administration stays root-only and stops at host preflight until the
machine is ready.

 Figure: Local work can begin with a draft claim and
retained evidence, but that is not the same authority as the broker.
Once the boundary moves to the broker, ordinary commits, read-only
snapshots, and privileged enrollment or rebind each follow different
checks, so the owner should not treat them as one flat write path.

 flowchart TD
 subgraph Local[Local path]
 A[Builder creates a draft claim]
 B[Retained evidence snapshot]
 A --> B
 end

 subgraph Broker[Broker authority]
 C[Ordinary commits]
 D[Read-only snapshot]
 E[Root-only enroll and rebind]
 C --> D
 C --> E
 end

 B --> F[Broker boundary]
 F --> C 

 The diagram separates the local path from broker authority. On the
local side, a builder creates a draft claim and stores a retained
evidence snapshot. At the broker boundary, ordinary commits, read-only
snapshots, and root-only enroll or rebind are handled as separate
authority paths. The consequence is that local record creation and
broker-controlled actions must be governed differently.

 Verified Facts

 The durable history is append-only, and projection state is treated
as a compatibility read surface.

 Reconciliation does not silently adopt a replaced store; it needs an
explicit reset acknowledgment, then it drops prepared work tied to the
old store and resumes from the new incarnation.

 A later negative verifier write can reopen a task if it demotes the
transition claim.

 The manual’s navigation keeps the local ledger first and demotes
privileged and secondary workflows to later chapters.

 Strengths

 This design has a few strong governance traits. Evidence snapshots
are retained and hashed instead of being treated as throwaway
attachments. Ordinary commits are role-gated, while snapshot reads stay
separate from mutating writes. The history model is append-only, and
reconciliation refuses to paper over a store replacement. Those
constraints give the owner a cleaner audit trail and a better chance of
understanding what can be rebuilt versus what must be preserved.

 When to Use Enrolled
Authority Mode

 Enrolled authority mode is the optional privileged layer above
the repo-local ledger. It matters when the owner needs a separate
host-managed trust boundary, not just local claim and evidence tracking.
The change is consequential. Administrators take over install,
enrollment, rotation, revocation, repository rebind, and
recovery. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 Enrolled authority mode is the optional privileged layer above the
repo-local ledger. It matters when the owner needs a separate
host-managed trust boundary, not just local claim and evidence
tracking.

 The change is consequential. Administrators take over install,
enrollment, rotation, revocation, repository rebind, and recovery. The
broker then enforces who may mutate trusted state, read-only snapshots
stay separate from mutating commits, and reconciliation will not quietly
adopt a replaced store. That gives the owner stronger control, but it
also creates a harder boundary to operate and recover.

 Mental Model

 Treat the product as local-first with an optional privileged layer on
top. In ordinary use, builders create claims and attach draft evidence,
verifiers sign off, and the ledger records that work. Enrolled authority
mode changes the trust model: administrators own the privileged
lifecycle, and the broker becomes the gate for durable trusted-state
changes.

 That is the owner decision in this chapter. If the team only needs
local evidence tracking, the local ledger is enough. If the team needs a
separate host-managed trust boundary with stronger role separation and
recovery discipline, enrolled authority mode is worth the cost.

 Figure: The owner keeps a lighter local loop until
the team truly needs a separate host-managed boundary. After enrollment,
privilege is no longer shared across everyone who touches the product:
administrators own the privileged lifecycle, while the broker keeps
trusted-state changes behind its own gate.

 flowchart TD
 A[Repo-local ledger]
 B[Authority enrolled]
 C[Builder]
 D[Verifier]
 E[Administrator]
 F[Broker]

 A -->|ordinary claim and evidence work| C
 A -->|ordinary claim and evidence work| D
 B -->|adds a privileged boundary| E
 B -->|puts trusted-state changes behind a gate| F
 C -->|draft claims and evidence| A
 D -->|verification writes| A
 E -->|owns the privileged lifecycle| B
 F -->|gates durable trusted-state changes| B 

 The diagram contrasts two operating modes. In the local mode,
builders and verifiers work against the repo-local ledger. In the
enrolled mode, authority is added as a separate boundary, administrators
own the privileged lifecycle, and the broker becomes the gate for
durable trusted-state changes. The consequence is that the team trades
simplicity for stronger role separation and controlled recovery.

 How It Works

 Enrollment is not a generic switch. The admin surface is root-only
and stops until host preflight passes, so privileged actions do not
blend into everyday product use. The client side resolves enrollment
through a fixed registry and repository identity check, which means a
moved or altered repository does not silently inherit authority.

 On the broker side, ordinary claim, evidence, and transition writes
are role-gated, while root-only enrollment and repository rebind stay
separate. The broker also keeps read-only snapshots apart from mutating
commits. Reconciliation is another deliberate step: if the authority
store has been replaced, the operator must explicitly acknowledge the
reset before reconciliation adopts the new incarnation. The day-to-day
claim and evidence loop stays in the core workflow chapter; host failure
and recovery details belong in the next chapter.

 Figure: Privileged administration is not just
another broker action. The owner gets a hard boundary: the root-only
surface must clear host checks before enrollment or rebind can happen,
and read-only snapshots remain separate from mutating commits so a
viewer path cannot drift into a write path.

 flowchart TD
 A[Root-only admin surface]
 B[Host checks pass]
 C[Enroll, rotate, revoke, rebind]
 D[Broker request path]
 E[Read-only snapshot request]
 F[Mutating commit request]

 A --> B
 B --> C
 D --> E
 D --> F
 E -->|stays read-only| D
 F -->|writes trusted state| D 

 The diagram shows two separations. First, the root-only admin surface
must pass host checks before enrollment, rotation, revocation, or
repository rebind can proceed. Second, within the broker, read-only
snapshot requests are handled on a separate path from mutating commit
requests. The consequence is that privileged setup and ordinary use do
not blend together, and read-only access cannot slip into a write.

 Verified Facts

 Local, non-enrolled work stays in the repo-local ledger, where claim
creation and evidence retention are separate from trusted
verification.

 Verified records fail closed when evidence prerequisites or
identity-isolation checks are broken, but draft records surface the same
conditions only as warnings or infos.

 The broker’s ordinary commit paths are role-gated, and root-only
enrollment or rebind stay outside that matrix.

 A later negative verifier write can reopen a task if the demoted
claim was the transition claim.

 Reconciliation refuses to silently adopt a replaced store unless the
operator explicitly acknowledges the reset.

 Read-only snapshots are handled separately from mutating broker
commits, so the same boundary does not apply to both kinds of
request.

 Strengths

 The design keeps the trust boundary visible instead of hiding it.
Local work stays light until the owner chooses to enroll authority.
After enrollment, the product does not pretend that every request is the
same: builders, verifiers, administrators, and the broker each have
their own lane, the broker is locked down, and store replacement is
explicit rather than silent.

 That makes it easier to audit who changed trust, not just what
changed. It also helps the owner see where trust became durable and
where it can still be reopened or reset.

 Operating Safely and
Recovering Cleanly

 This chapter is about what to do when the product stops being
routine: a host fails preflight, the broker is unavailable, the
authority store is replaced, or a run stops halfway through. The owner
question is not whether to improvise, but which recovery path matches
the failure that actually happened. The reviewed evidence supports a
bounded answer. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter is about what to do when the product stops being
routine: a host fails preflight, the broker is unavailable, the
authority store is replaced, or a run stops halfway through. The owner
question is not whether to improvise, but which recovery path matches
the failure that actually happened.

 The reviewed evidence supports a bounded answer. Reconcile when the
durable store or projection state has changed and the system needs
explicit reset acknowledgement before it will adopt the new state.
Resume when a checkpointed study or checkpointed dogfood run can
continue on the same validated plan. Restart or re-stage when the host,
socket, policy, or registry boundary is the thing that looks wrong.

 What this snapshot does not prove is just as important. It does not
establish live rollback safety or a full external harness compatibility
matrix, so this chapter keeps those boundaries explicit instead of
turning them into promises.

 Figure: The owner should not treat every stop the
same way. Recovery follows the boundary that failed: trust the machine
again, adopt the changed saved state with reconciliation, or continue a
checkpointed run only when the validated plan still matches.

 flowchart LR
 A[Recovery question] --> H[Host or enrollment boundary failed]
 A --> S[Saved state changed]
 A --> C[Checkpointed study or dogfood run]
 H --> R1[Re-stage]
 S --> R2[Reconcile]
 C --> R3[Resume]

 The figure shows one recovery question branching into three different
answers. If the host or enrollment boundary failed, the right move is to
re-stage. If the saved state changed underneath the product, the right
move is to reconcile. If the run was checkpointed and the validated plan
is still valid, the run can resume. The consequence is that owners
should choose recovery by failure boundary, not by habit.

 Mental Model

 Think about recovery in three layers. The first layer is the host and
enrollment boundary: the product needs the right privileges, the right
host checks, and the right registry identity before it can trust any
privileged action. The second layer is the durable ledger and projection
state: when that state changes underneath the product, the right move is
to reconcile rather than to guess. The third layer is checkpointed
execution: some study and dogfood runs can continue from a stored point,
but only inside the cataloged plan and only with the approval and quota
rules that the product already records.

 That is the practical split for an owner. If the host boundary is
wrong, re-stage. If the durable store changed, reconcile. If a run
stopped but the plan is still valid, resume. The earlier chapters own
the ordinary claim and verification loop; this chapter only tells you
what to do when the thing that failed is the boundary around that
loop.

 How Recovery Works

 Privilege comes first. The admin surface is root-only, and enrollment
or repository rebind does not begin until host preflight says the
machine is ready and the active policy is in force. Enrollment lookup is
pinned to a fixed registry path, requires absolute repository and socket
paths, and treats a changed repository identity as an error instead of
silently inheriting trust. The broker side is equally bounded: it uses a
restricted Unix socket, ties requests to the connecting peer, and keeps
the read-only snapshot path separate from mutating commit paths.

 That means the owner should read runbook-style guidance as the place
for setup, enrollment, rebind, and host repair, while ordinary workflow
guidance covers the everyday claim and evidence path. The runbook is
where you decide whether the machine is ready to be trusted at all. The
workflow chapters are where you decide whether a claim is verified.

 For state recovery, the key move is reconcile. When the authority
store or projection layer has been replaced, the system does not
silently adopt the new incarnation. It asks for explicit reset
acknowledgement, resets its sequence progress, drops prepared work tied
to the old store, and then retries prepared broker operations in an
idempotent way. That is a bounded recovery path, not a generic repair
mode.

 For resumed work, the evidence is narrower but still useful. Study
plans are validated before execution, mutating phases need explicit
approval, quota exhaustion is surfaced as a state, and a resume path can
continue from a stored run id. Dogfood runs are checkpointed as well.
These are resumable flows, but they are not proof that every external
provider binary or every interrupted host interaction can safely
continue in place.

 Figure: Reconcile is a guarded adoption path, not a
silent swap. The system waits for explicit acknowledgement, clears
progress tied to the old store, and only then retries prepared work so
the owner does not mistake a rebuilt state for a safe automatic
takeover.

 stateDiagram-v2
 [*] --> StoreChanged: new incarnation appears
 StoreChanged --> AskReset: request explicit reset acknowledgement
 AskReset --> ResetProgress: acknowledgement given
 ResetProgress --> DropOldWork: old prepared work is discarded
 DropOldWork --> RetryBrokerWork: prepared broker work retries idempotently
 RetryBrokerWork --> [*]: recovery completes

 The figure starts when a new store incarnation appears. Reconcile
then asks for explicit reset acknowledgement. After that
acknowledgement, the system resets sequence progress, drops prepared
work tied to the old store, and retries prepared broker work in an
idempotent way. The consequence is that a rebuilt authority state does
not take effect silently; the owner has to acknowledge the reset
first.

 Verified Facts

 Verified records are stricter than drafts. Doctor fails closed on
missing evidence references, missing verification commands,
self-verification, and malformed isolation metadata when the record is
verified. Draft and unverified records surface the same issues as
warnings or information instead, and warning-only runs still exit
successfully. That split matters in recovery because a warning on an
unfinished record does not mean the trust model itself is broken.

 The ordinary broker commit path is also role-gated. Builders can
create claims and attach draft evidence, verifiers can attach status,
and task transitions only happen when the current claim and task state
still satisfy the product’s trusted checks. Root-only enrollment and
rebind are separate request kinds, so the ordinary builder and verifier
roles do not cover the whole authority surface.

 One more fact changes the recovery story: a later negative verifier
write can reopen a task if it was the transition claim. Closeout is
therefore not monotonic. A task that looked finished can become active
again after later verification changes, so the owner should treat
completion as provisional until the transition claim still holds.

 What Looks Solid

 The strongest property in this area is that the product does not blur
its boundaries. Privileged administration is kept root-only and
host-gated. Enrollment does not accept a casually moved registry entry.
The broker keeps read-only snapshot access separate from mutating
commits. Reconciliation does not silently swallow a replaced store.
Those are all signs that the product is trying to make drift visible
instead of hiding it.

 The execution side is also more disciplined than a generic retry
loop. Study plans are catalog-validated, mutating phases require
approval, quota exhaustion is explicit, and completed phases can be
replayed in a controlled way. Dogfood runs are checkpointed rather than
guessed at. And the top-level navigation still puts the local ledger
first, which helps the owner find the everyday path before reaching for
privileged or secondary tooling.

 Harnesses, Delegation, and
Study Work

 This chapter covers the extra work paths around the ledger:
handing a run to a harness, running study plans, replaying checkpointed
dogfood work, and doing small local A/B comparisons. The snapshot shows
how those paths behave today, so it tells you what the product does now,
not what you may want it to be. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter covers the extra work paths around the ledger: handing a
run to a harness, running study plans, replaying checkpointed dogfood
work, and doing small local A/B comparisons. The snapshot shows how
those paths behave today, so it tells you what the product does now, not
what you may want it to be. It is solid on validation, approvals, quota
pauses, and replay checkpoints, but it does not prove a full support
list for every external provider.

 Mental Model

 Read These Paths as
Evidence-Scoped

 No owner-confirmed product intent was supplied for this run, so the
safest way to read these workflows is as current code behavior rather
than as proof of where the product is meant to center itself. That
matters because this chapter is about secondary paths around the ledger:
it describes what the system can do today, but it does not prove that
these paths are the main story or the long-term organizing principle.
The practical consequence for an owner is simple: use this material to
understand present behavior and its limits, not to infer product
strategy.

 Support Paths, Not a New
Trust Model

 Harness and study work freeze a concrete execution shape. They make a
run more specific by binding it to named harness profiles and explicit
phases, and they keep the execution record orderly enough to replay or
resume under the right conditions. That is useful because it reduces
ambiguity about what was attempted and what was allowed to proceed. But
this structure is support infrastructure, not a replacement for the
ledger’s claim, evidence, and verification story. The ledger remains the
place where trust is established; these workflows only govern how a
delegated or experimental run is carried out around that core.

 A good way to picture the difference is this: the ledger answers
whether a claim has been backed by evidence and verified, while a study
plan answers how a particular run should unfold, in what order, and
under what limits. If a study run pauses for approval or quota, that
pause changes execution, not truth. If a checkpointed dogfood run
replays completed phases, that replay helps avoid redundant work, but it
still does not turn the run itself into the source of verification. For
an owner, the boundary is important: these paths can make work more
controlled and repeatable, but they do not carry the same trust meaning
as the ledger.

 Compatibility Stays Narrow

 The reviewed evidence does not establish a full external-provider
compatibility promise. It shows cataloged support for the harness
profiles used by study phases, and it shows a narrow local comparison
path, but it stops short of proving that every named external provider
binary works in all cases. That is a real boundary, not a cosmetic one.
Owners should therefore read support claims as bounded to the cataloged
profiles and the observed local workflows, not as a general guarantee
across the broader provider landscape.

 A concrete example: if a study plan names a supported harness
profile, the system can reason about that run in a structured way. If
the plan depends on some other external binary or provider setup, the
evidence here does not let you assume it will behave the same way. The
right mental model is that these workflows are dependable inside their
documented lane, while the edges beyond that lane remain unproven until
they are separately validated.

 Figure: The ledger remains the place where trust is
established. Harnessed study work, checkpointed replay, and local
comparison can control and repeat execution, but they stay in support
lanes and do not gain claim-evidence-verification authority from that
structure.

 flowchart TD
 L[Ledger trust center]
 H[Harnessed study run]
 D[Checkpointed replay]
 A[Local A/B comparison]
 T[Trusted records]
 H -->|runs beside| L
 D -->|runs beside| L
 A -->|runs beside| L
 L -->|establishes trust| T
 H -.->|does not establish trust on its own| T
 D -.->|does not establish trust on its own| T
 A -.->|does not establish trust on its own| T 

 The diagram shows a ledger trust center and three support lanes: a
harnessed study run, a checkpointed replay, and a local A/B comparison.
Each support lane sits beside the ledger and points back to trusted
records only through the ledger. The consequence for an owner is that
these workflows can organize execution, but they do not replace the
ledger as the source of trust.

 How It Works

 Entry Checks

 Study work does not begin by trusting whatever plan text arrives. The
plan is checked before launch, and it is rejected if it names an
operation the catalog does not recognize, puts phases in the wrong
order, supplies the wrong number of harness profiles, or marks a phase
as mutating when the phase shape says it should be read only. That early
rejection is the main mechanism that keeps a malformed study from
consuming time as if it were valid.

 For an owner, the consequence is simple: a bad plan fails at the door
instead of halfway through execution. That matters because it keeps the
run from looking partially successful just because some later step
happened to be runnable. The boundary is also important. This validation
tells you whether the study is structurally acceptable; it does not say
the external provider binaries behind every cataloged profile are
universally compatible.

 Phase States and Control

 Execution path 
 What controls entry or progress 
 Replay or retry rule 
 Scope 

 Main study run 
 Catalog validation, phase order checks, harness profile count
checks, and the mutating-versus-read-only shape of each phase; mutating
phases also wait for approval 
 Completed phases replay idempotently; quota exhaustion pauses the
run instead of forcing a guess 
 Study execution with explicit phase states and cataloged harness
profiles 

 Checkpointed dogfood run 
 Saved phase checkpoints plus the same approval and quota gates used
by study execution 
 Completed phases replay only when the saved plan fingerprint still
matches; failed work needs an explicit quota-reset acknowledgment before
retrying 
 Dogfood replay with retained checkpoints 

 Local A/B race 
 Only two local OpenCode arms are allowed 
 It is a local comparison only, not a broad replay path or a provider
matrix 
 Narrow comparison between two local arms 

 The table shows the practical split: the main study path is governed
by validation and explicit phase control, the checkpointed dogfood path
is governed by saved checkpoints, and the local A/B path stays
intentionally narrow. These are separate execution surfaces, not three
names for the same thing.

 Approval, Pause, Resume

 Once a study run is in motion, it moves through explicit phase states
rather than a single yes-or-no launch switch. The execution layer tracks
phases as completed, failed, waiting for quota, pending, or not started.
Mutating phases require approval before they proceed. If quota runs out,
the run pauses. Nothing is silently skipped, and nothing is assumed to
have finished just because the pipeline reached a later point.

 That pause behavior changes what resume means. To continue, the
operator has to acknowledge the quota reset explicitly. The same
acknowledgment is required when a failed phase is retried in the
checkpointed dogfood path. In practice, this means a paused run is
visible as paused work, not as hidden debt that the system resolves on
its own. A concrete example: a mutating study phase can wait for
approval after earlier read-only phases have already completed; if the
quota is then exhausted, the run stays paused until the owner resets
quota and acknowledges that reset before retrying.

 Checkpointed Replay

 Dogfood runs add a second layer of persistence by keeping completed
phases in checkpoints. That checkpointed replay is not a free restart.
The system reuses completed work only when the saved plan fingerprint
still matches, which is the safeguard against resuming an old shape of
work as if it were the current one. If the fingerprint no longer
matches, the old completed phases are not treated as fresh truth.

 The consequence for the owner is that replay is resumable, but only
within the same plan shape. That is useful when a long run was
interrupted for a recoverable reason, because completed work does not
need to be redone blindly. The boundary is equally clear: the checkpoint
does not authorize a different plan, and retrying failed work still
needs the same explicit quota-reset acknowledgment.

 Local Comparison

 The local A/B tool is deliberately smaller in scope than the other
execution paths. It compares two local OpenCode arms only. That gives
the owner a narrow comparison surface for local behavior, but it does
not establish broad provider coverage and it does not turn the result
into a general compatibility statement.

 A concrete way to read it is this: if you want to compare two local
arms on the same machine, the tool is built for that. If you want
evidence that every named provider binary behaves the same way, this
evidence does not give you that. The comparison is useful because it
stays bounded; its value comes from being a local race, not from
pretending to be a full external matrix.

 Figure: Malformed plans do not get a partial pass.
Once a plan validates, mutating phases still wait for approval, and
quota exhaustion turns into a visible pause that resumes only after an
explicit reset acknowledgment.

 stateDiagram-v2
 [*] --> Planned
 Planned --> Rejected: bad plan
 Planned --> Ready: plan validates
 Ready --> Running: launch
 Running --> WaitingApproval: mutating phase
 WaitingApproval --> Running: approval granted
 Running --> Paused: quota runs out
 Paused --> Running: quota reset acknowledged
 Running --> Done: phases complete
 Rejected --> [*]
 Done --> [*] 

 The lifecycle starts with a planned study. A bad plan is rejected
before execution begins. A valid plan becomes ready, then runs. If a
mutating phase appears, the run waits for approval before continuing. If
quota runs out, the run pauses and only resumes after the quota reset is
acknowledged. When all phases finish, the run ends. The consequence for
an owner is that failed validation, approval, and quota recovery are
separate control points rather than hidden states.

 Verified Facts

 Separate Entry Points

 The snapshot shows a command surface that stays local-ledger-first
instead of collapsing everything into one generic launcher. The core
claim-evidence-verification-doctor loop comes first, and the admin,
broker, study, and race paths remain separate entry points rather than
being flattened into a single menu. That layout matters because it keeps
the main trust story visible: the owner can tell which parts are
ordinary workflow, which parts are privileged administration, and which
parts are secondary harness work. For example, someone trying to run a
study does not have to infer that they are still inside the same lane as
the core ledger flow; the layout itself already separates those
concerns. What this fact does not prove is broader product intent or
runtime behavior beyond the documented ordering and command
taxonomy.

 Harness Setup Before Hashing

 The snapshot also shows that a harness run is not treated as an
abstract label alone. Before the plan is hashed, the setup records the
executable path, version, arguments, role, and workspace. In practice,
that means the run is anchored to a concrete execution shape: the same
named harness with different arguments or a different version is not the
same planned run, because the recorded setup changes first. For an
owner, that is useful when comparing reports or replaying a study,
because the recorded shape explains why two runs with the same broad
goal may not be equivalent. A simple scenario is a study that moves from
one binary version to another; the recorded setup captures that shift
before the plan identity is fixed. This fact stops at the recording
boundary, though: it does not tell us that the external tool will behave
the same way in every environment.

 Compatibility Boundary

 The evidence also leaves an important boundary open. The snapshot
does not establish runtime compatibility for every named external
provider binary. Put another way, the presence of a cataloged harness
profile or a named provider in the materials is not the same thing as a
proven, current promise that the binary will launch and work today. That
boundary matters for owners because it prevents over-reading the
snapshot as a universal support matrix. It is safe to say the system is
organized to track harnessed study work, but not safe to claim that
every external provider listed in the materials is runtime-verified in
this environment. A concrete example is a study configuration that names
multiple providers: the snapshot can show how the plan is recorded, yet
still leave one provider’s live behavior unproven.

 Figure: The snapshot gives owners a bounded support
story: cataloged harness profiles and local comparison are confirmed,
but that does not become a blanket promise that every named external
provider binary works everywhere.

 flowchart LR
 subgraph C[Confirmed here]
 P[Cataloged harness profiles]
 R[Checkpointed dogfood replay]
 L[Two local OpenCode arms]
 end
 subgraph U[Still unproven]
 B[Every named external provider binary]
 M[Full runtime compatibility matrix]
 end
 P -->|supports study phases| R
 L -->|stays local only| R
 P -.->|does not prove| B
 L -.->|does not prove| M 

 The comparison has two sides. One side is what the snapshot confirms:
cataloged harness profiles, checkpointed dogfood replay, and a local
two-arm comparison. The other side is what stays unproven: that every
named external provider binary works in the same way or that the product
has a full runtime compatibility matrix. The consequence for an owner is
that local and cataloged support should not be treated as universal
provider proof.

 What Is Solid Here

 Secondary by Design

 The strongest thing in this snapshot is the separation itself. The
command layout keeps the core ledger path, administration, broker work,
study runs, and local races in separate lanes, and the product is
introduced as local-ledger-first before the enrolled authority path.
That matters because it prevents harness work from being mistaken for
the trust center of the product. An owner can treat delegation briefs,
study plans, and local comparisons as supporting tools around claim,
evidence, verification, and doctor rather than as a substitute for them.
The boundary is important: this is a documented operating shape, not a
promise that the secondary lanes are irrelevant in every deployment. In
practice, it means a team can use a study run to test an alternate
workflow without rewriting the mental model of how trusted records are
established.

 Study Runs Are Readable

 Study execution is also solid because it exposes its failure modes
instead of hiding them. Plans are rejected before launch when they name
unknown operations, use the wrong phase order, provide the wrong number
of harness profiles, or mix mutating and read-only phases incorrectly.
Once a run starts, it does not treat all interruptions the same way. The
execution path tracks whether a phase is completed, failed, waiting on
quota, pending, or not started; mutating phases need approval; and quota
exhaustion pauses the run instead of pretending it succeeded. The owner
value is straightforward: you can tell whether a run is blocked by
policy, by capacity, or by a real failure, and resume is explicit rather
than magical. The checkpointed dogfood path reinforces that strength by
keeping completed phases and replaying them only when the saved plan
fingerprint still matches, with a deliberate quota-reset acknowledgment
before failed work is retried. That keeps the rerun story honest. What
this does not establish is universal external provider behavior; it
shows a controlled study workflow, not a blanket compatibility
guarantee.

 Narrow Local Comparison

 The local comparison tool is deliberately narrow, and that narrowness
is a strength. It compares only two local arms and excludes broader
frontier harnesses, so its output should be read as a local comparison,
not as evidence that every named external provider binary behaves the
same way. That lowers the risk of over-reading the result. An owner can
use it to compare two local choices quickly, knowing the comparison is
bounded and intentionally small. The limitation is the point: because
the tool does not pretend to cover the whole provider surface, it is
harder to mistake a useful local race for a general compatibility
matrix. In a workflow where trust still belongs to the ledger and
verification path, that restraint keeps the secondary tooling from
making claims it cannot support.

 Worked example

 A runnable version of this lives at examples/verified-work/run.sh 
and is executed on every CI run, so it cannot quietly stop working.
Nothing in it is stubbed: it writes a real module, runs a real
 pytest , then tries two things that should fail and shows
them failing —

 editing an evidence file after attachment → doctor 
reports a SHA-256 mismatch and exits non-zero

 a builder verifying its own claim under mode: enforced 
→ refused before anything is written

 The snippet below is the same lifecycle written out for reading
rather than running.

 The following end-to-end script demonstrates the creation and
lifecycle of a task and claim. It shows how to initialize the local
ledger, create a task, register a gate-bound claim, attach verifiable
evidence (with an explicit verification command and reviewer signature),
run the integrity doctor check, track a session’s usage metrics, and
generate a downstream brief.

 ./operator init # create .operator/ ledger (run this in a fresh throwaway dir) 

 # a couple of stand-in files so the claim's gate and evidence actually exist 
 mkdir -p tests/out 
 printf 'def retries(n): return n <= 3\ndef test_retry(): assert retries(3) and not retries(4)\n' > tests/test_upload.py 
 printf 'ok\n' > tests/out/upload.log 

 # open a task 
 ./operator task-create --objective "Add retry to the uploader" --id up-retry 

 # an agent registers a typed, gate-bound claim 
 ./operator claim-add --task up-retry --type test_passes \ 
 --text "uploader retries 3x on 5xx" --gate tests/test_upload.py 

 # attach evidence and record an advisory verification in the default single_user mode; 
 # --verify-cmd is inert audit metadata and is not executed by operator 
 ./operator evidence-attach tests/out/upload.log --task up-retry --claim claim-0001 \ 
 --type test_output --status verified --verified-by reviewer \ 
 --verify-cmd "pytest -q tests/test_upload.py" 

 # read-only consistency check: unverified / self-verified / unverifiable-evidence claims 
 ./operator doctor 

 # track the session + its cost, then close out with a brief for the next harness 
 ./operator session-start --task up-retry --harness claude # opens the session, recorded as usage-0001 
 ./operator session-end usage-0001 --outcome useful --cost 12.50 
 ./operator handoff-add --task up-retry --changed "uploader.py" --verified "retry test" --open "tune backoff" 
 ./operator export-brief --for codex --task up-retry 

 Command reference

 The operator CLI exposes 23 subcommands across the task
→ claim → evidence → verification → session → usage lifecycle. Run
 ./operator <command> --help for full flags.

 Setup — init creates the
 .operator/ ledger in the current repo. Re-running it on an
existing YAML-only ledger baselines those records into SQLite without
changing their visible IDs or files.

 Tasks -
 task-create --objective "…" [--id ID] [--repo R] [--assign A] [--review R] 
— open a task. - task-show [ID] — show a task’s claims,
evidence, and status. - task-route --task ID --review H /
 task-route --task ID --clear-review — append an auditable
correction to reviewer routing. - task-list — list all
tasks with outcome summaries. -
 decide --claim ID --decision approve|reject|defer --rationale "…" 
— operator ruling on a frozen proposal claim. Records UID; does not
require a distinct verifier UID.

 Claims (a claim is a typed, checkable assertion
bound to a gate) -
 claim-add --type TYPE --text "…" [--task ID] [--gate GATE] [--verify-cmd CMD] [--by WHO] 
— register a claim. --gate is an artifact path;
 --verify-cmd is the command a verifier reruns. Types:
 file_exists, test_passes, numeric_measurement, real_data, model_output, firmware_behavior, deployment_state, supervision_credit, paper_or_report_claim .
- claim-show [ID] / claim-list [--task ID] —
inspect claims.

 Evidence & verification (the core: a claim is
only as good as its evidence + a different-identity sign-off) -
 evidence-attach PATH_OR_URL --claim CID --type TYPE [--hash SHA256] [--status {verified,false,quarantined}] [--verified-by WHO] [--verify-cmd CMD] 
— attach an artifact and optionally verify the claim. Local files are
copied into the ledger and fingerprinted with SHA-256, byte size, and
modification time; --hash is an expected digest that must
match the local bytes before any evidence write. Missing filesystem
paths are rejected; non-file external references must use an explicit
URI scheme. Evidence types:
 run_log, manifest, database_query, test_output, git_commit, screenshot, transcript, paper_section, external_doc, session_crystal .
Crystal Markdown attaches via crystal-attach / imports via
 crystal-import (draft only); hook glue is
 crystal-bridge and
 session-end --attach-crystal (see
 CRYSTAL_LEDGER_INTEROP_SPEC.md and
 CRYSTAL_SESSION_BRIDGE_SPEC.md ). Under enforced identity
policy, draft attachment is a builder action and any status attachment
is a verifier action from an OS UID distinct from the claim author. -
 verify RUN_DIR — automated audit of a run directory’s
artifacts. - doctor [--audit] — read-only consistency check
across the ledger: flags unverified claims,
 self-verification , advisory verification, malformed
UID-isolated verification, and enforcement downgrades. Fails closed
(exit code 1) on verified/completed records if they lack required
evidence files, target repository references, matching gate/test files,
or valid command run hashes. It also verifies SQLite event hashes,
compares each latest event with the corresponding YAML projection, and
recomputes local evidence fingerprints. A changed verified source or
retained snapshot fails closed; an unavailable original source is
reported separately when its retained snapshot is still current. Remote
evidence without a local snapshot is explicitly uncheckable.
 doctor never executes a stored
 --verify-cmd .

 Sessions (track a coding session and its cost) -
 session-start --harness H [--task ID] [--force] -
 session-end --outcome {useful,partial,no_go,quarantined,reverted,unknown} --cost N 
- session-list [--open] [--task ID] [--harness H] 

 Usage / quota accounting -
 usage-add --harness H [--model M] [--outcome …] — capture a
pasted usage snippet. -
 usage-import --harness {claude,codex,gemini-agy,prime-agent} [--since …] [--dry-run] 
— auto-ingest token/usage from implemented harness session-log adapters.
Other registered harnesses, including Grok, can use
 session-start , usage-add , and manual
annotation until an adapter exists. The prime-agent adapter reads root
session transcripts under ~/.prime/agent/sessions/ 
(read-only, format v3 only): own usage fills the shared token columns;
the RLM subtree aggregate is kept in distinctly-named
 prime_agent.subtree_* fields so unlike units are never
summed. Prime Agent is metered here without being a registered harness
peer. -
 usage-summary [--by-task] [--by-harness] [--by-model] [--by-lane] [--offload-audit] [--metering] 
/ usage-annotate [--cost …] [--note …] .

 Briefs & handoff -
 brief --for H [--task ID] /
 export-brief --for H [--task ID] — generate a
harness-specific brief (copy-paste for the next agent).

 Headless delegation (all vendors with a CLI backend) 
-
 ./delegate-brief --task ID --brief FILE --harness {claude,codex,grok,gemini-agy,fable,openrouter} [options] 
- Preserves the brief under --deliver/.brief.md , optional
 --freeze path hashes, full log + exit code. -
 --record writes an Operator handoff (dispatch outcome only,
not acceptance). - Local model harness ids ( gemma4_local ,
…) are not agent CLIs — use ollama runners separately. - Example (Codex,
no paste):

 ./delegate-brief --task front-e1-gold-pack --brief .operator/briefs/front-e1-gold-pack.codex.NOW.md --harness codex --cwd . --deliver evals/local_lane_ladder/fixtures/e1-gold-pack --freeze evals/local_lane_ladder/GOLD_STANDARD.md --record 

 handoff-add [--task ID] [--changed …] [--verified …] [--claimed …] [--open …] 
— record a closeout.

 Configuration

 Operator is driven by files under .operator/ (created by
 init ); behavior is governed by a small set of
product-facing config:

 .operator/identity.yaml — the
identity-enforcement policy:

 mode : enforced # or: single_user (advisory) 
 uids : 
 1001 : 
 name : builder 
 roles : [ builder ] 
 1002 : 
 name : reviewer 
 roles : [ verifier ] 

 In enforced mode, claim creation and draft evidence
require the builder role. Status-bearing evidence requires
the verifier role, a matching --verified-by ,
and a verifier UID distinct from the recorded claim-author UID.
Rejections occur before artifacts or ledger records are written. A
legacy scalar entry such as 1001: builder remains loadable
and grants both roles, but the distinct UID rule still prevents
self-verification. In single_user , status writes remain
available and are recorded as advisory , never
 uid_isolated .

 .operator/{tasks,claims,evidence,handoffs,usage}/ 
— current YAML projections (gitignored).

 .operator/ledger.sqlite3 —
append-only, full-snapshot event versions for task, claim, evidence,
handoff, and usage/session records. Session commands version their
 usage-XXXX record.

 SQLite is the durable audit history for CLI writes; YAML remains the
compatibility read surface. Event versions are allocated
transactionally, linked by per-record SHA-256 hashes, and protected from
 UPDATE / DELETE through database triggers.
 doctor reports divergence but does not silently repair
either side. Because both live on the same writable disk, this improves
local durability and auditability; it is not an off-machine backup or an
adversarial tamper-proof boundary.

 The registry supplies role policy. The trusted boundary also requires
the processes to run under genuinely distinct OS UIDs; the CLI does not
provision those users or containers.

 Root-managed external policy
(P3b)

 Issue #5 adds the separate operator-admin installation
and policy lifecycle described in AUTHORITY_POLICY_SPEC.md .
It installs the standalone broker under fixed root-controlled paths,
creates SQLite only after dropping to the broker UID, and supports
strict generation-one install, append-only rotation, terminal
revocation, audit, and conservative privilege preflight.

 This is still not repo CLI integration. operator and
existing .operator ledgers do not consult the external
authority yet. The service is installed but not started or enabled, and
real-host privilege proof remains issue #7. Initial installation must
execute a root-owned staged copy of operator-admin ; its
privileged wrapper intentionally refuses a user-writable checkout.

 Appendix —
Attention Items and Owner Decisions

 The deduplicated set of caveats and open decisions two Reflect scans
surfaced. Forty in-chapter cards across the two runs collapse to the
twenty-two distinct items below. The two scans described the same
product in different words, so items are stated once here rather than
twice.

 Operating caveats — things to
know

 Trusted verification needs a genuinely distinct
verifier. Under mode: enforced , a verification
only counts when the verifier’s OS uid differs from the claim author’s.
A different harness name buys nothing. Two agents under one Unix user
are one identity.

 A harness name is routing, not authority. 
 assigned_harness and review_harness describe
where work goes. Neither confers the right to bless a claim.

 Enrolled authority is a separate, root-managed
surface. Enrollment, rotation, revocation and rebinding are
privileged operations with host prerequisites. They are not part of the
daily loop, and a failure there is usually a missing prerequisite rather
than a product fault.

 A broker receipt is not local convergence. The
broker accepting a protected change means the change was authorized, not
that the repository has finished reconciling.

 Durable history is local, and projections are not
backup. Compatibility views can be rebuilt; they do not
reconstruct the authority store. Back up canonical history, not the
projections derived from it.

 Store replacement is never silent. Reconciliation
refuses to adopt a new store incarnation without explicit
acknowledgment. A rebuilt store can look healthier than it is, so
rehearse the acknowledgment step before you need it.

 Status-bearing evidence can reopen finished work. 
Attaching evidence with a status can move a task backward or out of
trusted state. Closeout is not one-way.

 Doctor is strict on verified records and advisory on
drafts. A warning on draft material is not the same signal as
an error on a verified claim. Read the level, not just the presence of
output.

 Doctor never executes anything. It validates paths,
bytes and identity. A recorded required_gate is an artifact
path it checks for existence; the rerunnable command lives in
 verify_cmd and is run by a verifier, never by doctor.

 Study and dogfood runs have bounded recovery, not open-ended
replay. A partial run resumes under defined rules or it does
not resume. Neither is a general rerun queue.

 Study runs stop for approval or quota. A paused
study is a gate doing its job, not a failure. Someone has to resume
it.

 Dogfood is a privileged run. It is bound to
installed machine paths and a release digest, with a deliberately narrow
recovery path. Treating it as a retry button hands out a powerful
command with less slack than people expect.

 Harness support is proven only for cataloged
profiles. The twelve profiles seeded at
 operator init are the validated set. Anything else may
write compatible ledger records manually, but it is not a supported
adapter.

 Local A/B results are easy to overread. The
comparison tool is a narrow local instrument. Its output is a
measurement of one machine on one day, not a general benchmark.

 Rollback and provisioning safety are not proven from source
alone. A checkout is not a production install, and reading the
code does not demonstrate that recovery works on a live host.

 Owner decisions — still open

 Stay on the local ledger, or enroll authority? The
local path is the documented default. Enrollment buys a root-managed
boundary and costs host prerequisites and operational surface.

 Who owns reconciliation and store-reset
acknowledgment? And should explicit acknowledgment be a
first-class documented step rather than an implicit one?

 Are study plans and phase catalogs owner-facing? 
They can be presented as supported product workflows or as
operator-internal material. They are currently documented as both.

 Should dogfood stay administrator-only with one acknowledged
retry? 

 Is closeout provisional until the transition claim stays
verified? 

 Should quota exhaustion pause a study for resumption, or stop
the run outright? 

 Should the local A/B tool stay a narrow local comparison
instrument? 

 Should root-only enrollment and rebind be documented as a
separate privileged surface, rather than as advanced options
inside the main flow?

 Should warning-only doctor output be described as advisory
for drafts in the owner-facing documentation, or left to the
reader to infer from severity?

 Resolved since the first
scan

 Three items raised by the first scan are answered in the repository
and no longer open: whether the local ledger or enrolled authority leads
(the local ledger does), whether the cataloged harness profiles are the
supported set (they are), and a caveat about generated export material
drifting from live behavior, which applied to a previously generated
manual that has since been removed from the tree.