# SOURCE: https://bulkheadtau.com/bulkhead-tau/reflect/bt-inc-platform.html
# captured 2026-09-21, text extracted from the live page

BT Inc Platform Owner Manual 

 BT Inc Platform Owner Manual

 Owner’s Manual for
blue-az/bt-inc-platform

 6 generated chapters from the reviewed repository
snapshot 

 Source:
blue-az/bt-inc-platform:main@9950f2185f82384943803e8fc489193ae300ac5e

 Synthetic / Safe Mode
Boundary

 bt-inc-platform is a synthetic multi-domain conglomerate
used to probe Reflect’s product-fit bar. BT Inc. is a
fictional cross-sector investment and equity research firm. The manual
should be read as a truthful map of a synthetic platform, not as
evidence that a real operating company or unified production cockpit
exists.

 The generated manual passes the primary honesty check: it does not
present the fiction as operational reality. It repeatedly keeps the
workspace desk-first, says the shared shell/router is unverified, and
marks the portfolio desk as Safe Mode with sanitized/mock data rather
than live holdings.

 Owner Quickstart

 Useful local checks:

 python3 -m pytest desks/osat_semiconductors/tests/test_variation4_hitl.py -q
python3 desks/medtech_intelligence/p0_generate_minimal_workflows.py
python3 desks/portfolio_mgmt/p0_generate_minimal_workflows.py 

 Repository boundaries:

 Large SQLite databases are intentionally excluded.

 Portfolio data is sanitized Safe Mode: no live holdings, account
numbers, transactions, or balances.

 Medtech, semiconductor, OSAT, industrials, trading, and portfolio
desks are separate desk families.

 Shared cockpit/router language is aspirational until verified in
live code.

 Recent Additions Since
The Reflect Scan

 OSAT advisory score history now fails closed when the JSON file is
corrupt or not a list.

 generate_advisory_hypotheses returns
 status=blocked with
 reason=score_history_unreadable when score history cannot
be trusted.

 list_advisory_hypothesis_scores also reports a blocked
gate state for unreadable score history.

 desks/osat_semiconductors/tests/test_variation4_hitl.py 
now loads the local BT Inc. OSAT tool module by file path rather than
accidentally importing Project Phoenix’s external
 domains.xAmkor copy.

 What This Repository
Actually Owns

 This repository does not read like one neat app shell. The
reviewed evidence shows separate desk families: medtech with a
deterministic analyst route, semiconductors with tiered variations, OSAT
as a later desk chapter, and portfolio in Safe Mode on sanitized
snapshot data. This chapter gives you the first trustworthy map of those
parts, not a promise that they all sit behind one verified shared
cockpit. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This repository does not read like one neat app shell. The reviewed
evidence shows separate desk families: medtech with a deterministic
analyst route, semiconductors with tiered variations, OSAT as a later
desk chapter, and portfolio in Safe Mode on sanitized snapshot data.
This chapter gives you the first trustworthy map of those parts, not a
promise that they all sit behind one verified shared cockpit.

 That matters because the live runtime evidence is narrower than the
top-level docs suggest. The shared router idea was not verified in the
reviewed runtime, so this book starts from what the code-backed work
does today and keeps the unproven parts clearly marked for you to
confirm.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 Explain why the manual is organized around separate desk families
instead of one verified shared shell.

 Name the main desk families and know which later chapters own the
deeper workflow detail.

 Separate analyst question-answering from operator refresh and
maintenance work.

 Recognize where capability changes by variation tier and where Safe
Mode changes the meaning of outputs.

 State the biggest evidence gaps before treating the repository as
complete product truth.

 Read the Product as Separate
Desks

 Start with desks, not a shell

 Treat the workspace as a set of desk families with their own
boundaries. The reviewed runtime evidence supports desk-local
SQLite-backed surfaces, but it does not verify the single shared shell
or router that the top-level documents imply. For the owner, that
changes the default question: do not ask, “What does the whole app do?”
first. Ask, “What does this desk prove on its own?” That is the safer
way to read the repository until a common front door is confirmed in
live behavior.

 This matters because a unified shell would suggest one product
contract, one navigation model, and one shared tool bundle. The evidence
does not support that assumption. What it supports is a collection of
desks that can be reviewed, explained, and bounded separately. The
manual should therefore organize around desk families, and later
chapters should be read as desk-specific evidence rather than as
interchangeable slices of one platform.

 Use variation as the second
axis

 Once the desk is fixed, variation becomes the next comparison unit.
Some desks do not change by a single flat bundle of tools; they change
by tier or variation, and that variation can materially alter what the
desk can do. Semiconductors is the clearest example of that pattern: it
is organized into eight variation families, so the owner should think in
terms of desk plus variation, not desk alone. A variation is not just a
cosmetic label. It is part of the product shape.

 The consequence for the owner is practical. If you compare two
semiconductors variations as if they were the same package, you will
miss real capability differences. The same is true of portfolio, where
the tool set grows cumulatively rather than being replaced wholesale.
That means later variations add to earlier ones instead of resetting the
desk into a new identity. The mental model to carry forward is simple:
some desks have one stable role, while others expose that role through
staged capability layers.

 Keep Portfolio separate

 Portfolio should stay mentally separate as a sanitized Safe Mode
desk. The reviewed evidence marks it as Safe Mode and snapshot-bounded,
so its outputs are best read as mock portfolio logic, not live holdings
truth. That boundary is important because it prevents the owner from
overreading portfolio results as if they were current account state. The
desk can still be useful for bounded research and comparison, but it
does so inside a controlled frame.

 Medtech and semiconductors are the best first exemplars because they
make the desk model visible from two different angles. Medtech is the
clean anchor for a desk whose analyst path is distinct from maintenance
work, while semiconductors is the clearest anchor for tiered variation.
Portfolio then supplies the cautionary case: a desk can be real, useful,
and deliberately bounded at the same time. Read those three together and
the repository becomes easier to hold in one head: separate desks,
variation where capability changes, and Safe Mode where the evidence
says outputs are intentionally constrained.

 Figure: The evidence supports a desk-first map, not
one verified shared front door. That keeps the owner from treating the
repository like a single cockpit before the shared shell is actually
proven in live behavior.

flowchart TD
 A[Reviewed runtime] --> B[Separate desk families]
 B --> C[Medtech desk]
 B --> D[Semiconductor desk]
 B --> E[Portfolio desk]
 A -.-> F[Shared shell and router not yet proved]
 B -.-> F

 The reviewed runtime points to separate desk families rather than one
confirmed shared shell. Medtech, semiconductors, and portfolio sit under
a desk-first map, while the shared shell and router remain unproven. The
consequence for the owner is that navigation should be read desk by desk
until a common front door is verified.

 How the Main Desks Behave

 Analyst work stays read-only

 The medtech desk draws a hard line between answering questions and
changing data. In the analyst route, prompts are deterministically sent
into one of six analytical tools, and those tools only read from the
local database. That means a request such as “show the device mix by
segment” can be answered without opening any write path at all.

 For the owner, the consequence is practical: analyst research is safe
to treat as read-only behavior, while maintenance work belongs to a
separate path that can still write device records. The boundary matters.
The evidence supports the split inside this desk package, not a blanket
promise that every medtech-related operation is read-only in every
context. If a separate import job updates the device list, that is
maintenance work, not analyst answering.

 Refreshes can leave
partial snapshots

 The refresh paths in semiconductors and xAmkor are ordered, but they
are not atomic. They normalize first, then pull from upstream sources,
and only after that do they rebuild the local database from snapshot
files. Individual failures do not stop the whole chain, and a warning
during one source pull does not necessarily cancel the later
rebuild.

 That changes what a completed run means for the owner. A finished
refresh can still leave a partial snapshot: some sources may have
updated while others did not. That is better than pretending the whole
workspace either fully succeeded or fully failed, because the output
tells you how far the run got. The limit is equally important: the
evidence shows best-effort behavior, not a guarantee that every run
leaves a complete, current, all-or-nothing result. In practice, a
morning refresh might update most tickers, skip one failing source, and
still rebuild the desk so analysts can keep working from a usable
partial snapshot instead of waiting for perfection.

 Safe Mode bounds portfolio
outputs

 Portfolio is deliberately not presented as live holdings truth. It
runs in Safe Mode on sanitized snapshot data, with a local portfolio
database underneath. Mechanically, that means the desk is designed to
produce bounded research outputs from a controlled snapshot, not to
mirror a real account in real time.

 The owner consequence is straightforward: portfolio outputs can
support mock portfolio logic and research workflows, but they should not
be used as if they were live positions, balances, or account state. The
boundary is the whole point of the mode. The evidence establishes the
safe, sanitized snapshot frame; it does not establish freshness,
completeness, or live market or account parity. If a report shows a
holding count after the market has moved, that number belongs to the
snapshot the desk was built from, not to a live trading account.

 Capability
changes with the desk and the tier

 The repository does not behave like one flat tool bundle. Capability
changes by desk, and within some desks by variation tier. Semiconductors
is explicitly tiered, with later variations adding more specialized work
instead of just repeating the same base package, and portfolio’s tool
set grows cumulatively as the variation number rises.

 That matters because the owner cannot assume a tool seen in one desk
or one variation is available everywhere else. A plain research view
might exist in one tier while another tier adds comparison,
write-and-verify, or export-oriented capabilities. The boundary is that
these differences are desk-local and tier-local; the evidence does not
support a single universal capability ladder across the whole workspace.
In practice, if an analyst asks for a specialized output in a lower tier
and it is missing, that is not necessarily a platform failure. It may
simply be a capability that only exists in a later variation of that
desk.

 Figure: The read-only promise belongs to the analyst
route, not the whole desk package. That means research can be trusted as
non-destructive while separate maintenance work still has write power
over device records.

flowchart TD
 subgraph R[Read-only analyst path]
 A[Analyst prompt] --> B[Six analytical tools]
 B --> C[Read-only answers]
 end
 subgraph W[Separate maintenance path]
 D[Import job] --> E[Writes device records]
 end
 C --> F[Device data]
 E --> F

 Medtech has two separate paths. The analyst prompt goes through six
analytical tools and returns read-only answers from device data. A
separate import job can write device records outside that analyst route.
The consequence is that only the analyst path should be treated as
read-only.

 Figure: Refresh is ordered but best-effort, so
completion does not guarantee completeness. The owner should expect a
usable result that can still be partial when one source pull fails along
the way.

flowchart LR
 A[Start refresh] --> B[Normalize first]
 B --> C[Pull one source]
 C --> D[Pull another source]
 C -.-> E[One source can fail]
 D -.-> E
 D --> F[Rebuild from snapshots]
 E --> F
 F --> G[Usable but possibly partial snapshot]

 A refresh starts by normalizing, then pulls sources one by one, and
finishes by rebuilding from snapshots. If one source fails, the chain
can still continue instead of stopping immediately. The consequence is
that a finished refresh can still leave a partial but usable
snapshot.

 What the Reviewed
Evidence Locks Down

 The reviewed runtime sets a narrower ceiling than the top-level docs
suggest. What is actually verified is a desk-first workspace with
desk-local SQLite services, not a proved single shared shell or router.
That matters because this section is about evidence, not aspiration: the
owner can trust the live surface only where the runtime itself was
observed, and should keep any presumed common front door in the
unverified bucket until it is seen in live code.

 Verified Boundary Map

 Read the table as a boundary map, not a feature list. It separates
what the reviewed evidence proves from what it does not, so the owner
can tell which parts of the repository are safe to treat as live truth
and which parts remain provisional.

 Evidence area 
 Verified live shape 
 What is not verified 
 Owner takeaway 

 Navigation surface 
 Desk-local SQLite services are the live surface the evidence
supports. 
 A single shared shell or router has not been proved in the reviewed
runtime. 
 Treat the repository as desk-first until a common front door is
demonstrated. 

 Medtech analyst route 
 The analyst path is deterministic and read-only, using six
analytical tools and read-only database queries; separate maintenance
jobs can still write device records. 
 The analyst route is not a general write path, and write support
outside it is not the same thing as analyst research. 
 Trust medtech research outputs as read-only, while keeping imports
and maintenance separate. 

 Semiconductors 
 The desk is explicitly organized into eight variation families. 
 It is not verified that all variations expose the same tools or that
tiering is cosmetic. 
 Expect capability to change by variation, not by one flat
bundle. 

 Portfolio 
 Variation tiers are cumulative at 33, 42, 53, and 60 tools, and the
desk runs in Safe Mode with sanitized data. 
 This is not verified as live holdings data or as a flat tool
registry across tiers. 
 Use the counts to compare tier growth, but keep the desk bounded as
sanitized snapshot work. 

 What Each Boundary Means

 Medtech is the clearest proof of how a desk-local path behaves when
the evidence is tight. The analyst route is deterministic: when a prompt
is recognized, the system routes it through one of six analytical tools,
and those tools issue read-only queries rather than changing the
underlying data. The consequence for the owner is practical: research
answers are meant to be stable and non-destructive, so the analyst can
ask questions without risking accidental mutation through the research
path. The boundary is just as important. The evidence does not say the
medtech desk has no write capability at all; it says write-oriented
maintenance jobs sit outside the analyst route. A concrete example is an
import job that updates device records while the analyst experience
remains read-only. If the database is missing or a prompt is not
recognized, the analyst path fails instead of improvising, which is
exactly the kind of bounded behavior an owner can plan around.

 Semiconductors is the opposite of a flat bundle. The evidence says
the desk is explicitly grouped into eight variation families, which
means capability is packaged by variation rather than released as one
uniform set. The mechanism here is simple: the desk presents a
progression of variants, and the reviewed modules line up with that
progression. For the owner, that changes how capability should be read.
A baseline variation and a later variation are not just different labels
on the same surface; they can carry different tool sets and different
levels of depth. The boundary is that the evidence proves the tiering
structure, not a promise that every variation exposes identical tools or
that the structure never changes. A useful way to picture it is that one
variation may be suited to basic analysis while a later one carries more
specialized research outputs; the important part is that the difference
belongs to the desk and the tier, not to a one-size-fits-all platform
rule.

 Portfolio proves a different kind of fact: the capability count grows
cumulatively across tiers, and the desk is explicitly marked Safe Mode
with sanitized data. The mechanism is additive. Later tiers append to
earlier tool registries rather than replacing them, and the reviewed
counts rise through 33, 42, 53, and 60 tools. For the owner, this is
useful because it turns portfolio capability into something measurable
by tier instead of a vague impression of expansion. It also keeps the
meaning of the desk honest. Safe Mode and sanitized data mean the desk
is bounded to a mock or snapshot context, so its outputs should not be
mistaken for live holdings truth. A concrete example is a portfolio
research flow that is good enough to exercise workflow and compare
tiered tooling, but not something to use for account reconciliation or
live position checks. The verified fact is that the desk is designed to
stay inside that boundary.

 Taken together, these facts give the owner a reliable opening map:
the live identity is desk-local, medtech is read-only on its analyst
path, semiconductors is explicitly tiered, and portfolio is both
cumulative and sanitized. What is still not proved is just as important:
there is no verified shared shell or router yet, so the manual should
keep navigation and capability claims at the desk level until that
evidence appears.

 Figure: The owner should compare desks by the rule
each one uses. Semiconductors changes by variation, portfolio grows by
accumulation, and Safe Mode narrows meaning instead of turning outputs
into live truth.

flowchart LR
 A[How the owner should read capability] --> B[Semiconductors]
 A --> C[Portfolio tiers]
 A --> D[Portfolio Safe Mode]
 B --> E[Capability changes by variation]
 C --> F[Later tiers add tools]
 D --> G[Outputs stay inside sanitized snapshot logic]

 Compare the desks on different rules. Semiconductors changes
capability by variation. Portfolio grows capability by adding tools in
later tiers. Portfolio Safe Mode keeps outputs inside sanitized snapshot
logic. The consequence is that the owner cannot treat all desk outputs
as the same kind of product truth.

 What Is Solid Here

 Desk boundaries that hold up

 The strongest part of the evidence is where the docs and the live
behavior agree on desk-local boundaries. That matters because it gives
the opening map something stable to stand on: the repository does not
need a single verified cockpit to be intelligible, and the manual does
not have to pretend otherwise. The medtech analyst route being read-only
while separate maintenance scripts handle writing is a good example of
the same boundary line. For the owner, that means the first trust
decision is not “which one grand interface am I looking at?” but “which
desk am I in, and what kind of work is this desk actually built to do?”
The limit is just as important as the strength: the shared shell and
router suggested by top-level docs were not verified in the reviewed
runtime, so the map stays desk-first rather than platform-first.

 Variation is explicit, not
inferred

 The semiconductors desk is unusually useful because its variation
system is named clearly enough to support tier-by-tier explanation
instead of guesswork. That makes capability changes easier to reason
about: the owner can see that differences are packaged as variations,
not hidden inside one flat bundle that somehow becomes larger or smaller
without explanation. In practice, that reduces the chance of reading a
richer variation as a surprise or a lighter one as a defect when it is
really just a different tier. The boundary is that this strength depends
on the current evidence remaining explicit; if future variations overlap
in a way the reviewed material does not yet show, the tidy tier story
would need to be rechecked. A concrete reading is simple: if one
variation adds comparison tools and another adds plotting or output
packaging, the owner should understand that as deliberate desk
packaging, not as an accidental drift in what the desk means.

 Safe Mode stays bounded

 Portfolio is clearly marked as Safe Mode with sanitized data, and
that clarity is a real strength. It keeps the desk tightly bounded so
its outputs are read as controlled research or mock portfolio logic
rather than live holdings truth. For the owner, that sharply changes how
to use the desk: it is suitable for bounded analysis, demonstrations, or
internal review, but not for interpreting the result as an account
statement. The boundary is explicit in the evidence, which is exactly
what makes the desk safe to include in the opening map; if Safe Mode
were not clearly marked, the same outputs would carry much more
ambiguity. A practical example is a portfolio summary that looks
plausible and structured but still must be treated as sanitized snapshot
material, not current positions or balances.

 Refresh failures stay
legible

 The refresh behavior in semiconductors and xAmkor is best-effort
rather than all-or-nothing, and that is a strength because it makes
failure modes readable. The refresh chain tries to continue after
individual source problems, so a broken pull does not automatically
erase the rest of the run. For the owner, that means freshness can be
partial, but partial freshness is still visible and actionable; the
system is not pretending that every refresh is atomic when it is not.
This is a better contract than a false guarantee of completeness because
it tells operators and reviewers where the uncertainty lives. The
boundary is equally clear: best-effort does not mean complete, and a
successful rebuild can still leave mixed freshness or partial snapshots.
A concrete scenario is a source pull that fails for one symbol while the
rest of the chain succeeds; the resulting snapshot may still be useful,
but it should be read as incomplete rather than magically whole.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - desk-local
navigation evidence and the absence of a verified shared shell - the
medtech analyst route and its separate maintenance writers - tiered
variation registries in semiconductors and cumulative tool growth in
portfolio - best-effort refresh behavior in semiconductors and xAmkor -
the portfolio Safe Mode policy and its sanitized snapshot boundary

 Not reviewed: - a verified shared cockpit or router - live runtime
state outside the reviewed evidence - external databases, feeds, or
snapshots that were not part of the reviewed material - detailed
advisory gate behavior beyond the opening map

 If the product shape changes, re-check the live desk entry points,
variation registries, refresh scripts, and Safe Mode policy. If a shared
shell appears, or if any desk begins to promise atomic refresh or live
holdings, update this opening map only after re-verifying those claims
in current code and documentation.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 How a Desk Operates

 This chapter gives the owner the working model, not a full
platform map. The reviewed evidence supports separate desk families with
desk-local SQLite services, analysts using desk tools to answer
questions, operators refreshing and rebuilding local data where
maintenance flows exist, and reviewers appearing only inside gated
advisory work. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter gives the owner the working model, not a full platform
map. The reviewed evidence supports separate desk families with
desk-local SQLite services, analysts using desk tools to answer
questions, operators refreshing and rebuilding local data where
maintenance flows exist, and reviewers appearing only inside gated
advisory work. The main boundary is simple: the desk model is verified,
but a single shared shell, external data assets, and some caller
boundaries are not.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 See which part of the product is analyst-facing, which part is
operator-maintained, and where reviewer gates enter.

 Distinguish tool tiers and variation growth from one flat product
bundle.

 Know where refresh, validation, and Safe Mode behavior stop at the
reviewed evidence boundary.

 Spot the places where the product can drift: partial refreshes,
fail-open gates, and unresolved authority boundaries.

 Mental Model

 Treat the workspace as a set of desk families, not one proven shared
shell. The owner should expect the analyst, operator, and reviewer roles
to hand off differently from desk to desk. Analysts ask questions
through desk-local tools and receive research output. Operators refresh
sources, normalize them, and rebuild local SQLite snapshots where those
workflows exist. Reviewers show up only where a desk adds a gate around
an advisory result.

 That is why the manual should stay desk-first. Some desks are
read-only for the analyst route, some add more tools as the variation
grows, and some add Safe Mode or review checkpoints. Portfolio is
explicitly sanitized and Safe Mode, so it should be read as controlled
portfolio logic rather than live holdings.

 Figure: Do not collapse the manual into one shared
shell: the verified runtime is desk-local, and the analyst route stays
read-only while separate maintenance scripts can still write
locally.

flowchart TD
 U[Unproven shared shell]
 V[Verified desk families]
 A[Analyst route]
 R[Read-only research]
 M[Separate maintenance scripts]
 W[Local writes]
 U -. not verified in live code .-> V
 V --> A --> R
 V --> M --> W

 The diagram separates an unproven shared shell from the verified desk
families. Inside the verified side, the analyst route leads to read-only
research, while separate maintenance scripts lead to local writes. The
consequence is that the owner should keep the manual desk-first until a
shared shell is proven in live code.

 How It Works

 The clearest analyst path is medtech: a prompt is routed to one of
six tools, the database handle is opened directly, and the tool bodies
issue read-only queries. The same desk package also includes separate
import scripts that can write local data, so the package is not entirely
read-only even though the analyst route is.

 Variation is what changes capability. Semiconductors is tiered by
variation, with later tiers adding more specialized comparison,
note-taking, run-tracking, plotting, and research-pack surfaces.
Portfolio uses the same general idea but grows cumulatively, with later
variations appending to earlier tool registries instead of replacing
them.

 Refresh is a separate operator path. In the desks that ship
maintenance flows, source normalization comes before pulls and the final
SQLite rebuild, and the refresh chain continues past individual upstream
failures. That means refresh is best-effort, not atomic, and a completed
run does not prove complete freshness.

 Governance is part of the model too. The portfolio P0 validation
policy keeps the saved artifact bounded to the local snapshot and
current variation implementations, not to a claim of full cockpit
coverage. In the advisory flow, the score-list view can still show the
current gate state when no score history exists. After this pass,
corrupt or non-list score history blocks instead of being treated as
empty history. The reviewed score submission body also accepts
caller-supplied reviewer and gate values, and the outer caller boundary
was not verified, so reviewer authority is not proven at the point that
matters.

 Figure: Variation is not one flat bundle.
Semiconductors grows by tier, while portfolio grows by appending
capability across variations, so the owner should read desk coverage as
versioned and desk-specific.

flowchart LR
 subgraph S1[Semiconductors]
 S[Baseline desk]
 ST[Each tier adds more tools]
 S --> ST
 end
 subgraph P1[Portfolio]
 P[Baseline desk]
 PC[Each variation appends tools]
 P --> PC
 end

 One branch shows semiconductors growing by tiers, where each tier
adds more tools. The other branch shows portfolio growing cumulatively,
where each variation appends tools instead of replacing the earlier set.
The consequence is that capability should be read as desk-specific
growth, not as one uniform product bundle.

 Figure: Refresh is staged and best-effort, so a
completed run can still leave partial snapshots before the rebuild
settles the local data. Success does not prove complete freshness.

flowchart LR
 A[Normalize sources]
 B[Pull upstream data]
 C[Continue after a miss]
 D[Rebuild the local store]
 E[Partial snapshot can remain]
 A --> B --> C --> D --> E

 The refresh path starts by normalizing sources, then pulls upstream
data, keeps going after a miss, and rebuilds the local store. Even after
the run completes, a partial snapshot can still be left behind for a
while. The consequence is that a finished refresh is not the same thing
as fully fresh data.

 Verified Facts

 The strongest verified surface is desk-first navigation: the live
proof points are separate desk-local SQLite services, not a proven
shared cockpit or router. Medtech keeps the analyst route deterministic
and read-only, while separate maintenance scripts can still write.
Semiconductors and portfolio both use variation tiers to change
capability instead of one flat bundle. The portfolio desk is sanitized
and Safe Mode, and the xAmkor advisory surface has a clean empty-state
score view. After this pass, corrupt score history fails closed instead
of being treated as empty history.

 Figure: The advisory gate has an explicit
empty-state path when no score history exists. After this pass, corrupt
score history fails closed; reviewer identity is still caller-supplied
and the outer caller boundary remains unverified. That means reviewer
control is not proven where the write actually happens.

flowchart TD
 H[Missing score history]
 C[Corrupt score history]
 G[Advisory gate]
 O[Empty state continues]
 X[Blocked until repaired]
 W[Score writer]
 F[Caller-provided review fields]
 B[Outer caller boundary]
 H --> G --> O
 C --> G --> X
 W --> F
 B -. not verified .-> W

 The first part of the diagram separates missing score history from
corrupt score history: missing history remains an empty unscored state,
while corrupt history now blocks until repair. The second part shows the
score writer taking caller-provided review fields, with the outer caller
boundary still unverified. The consequence is that unreadable
persistence no longer silently reopens the gate, but reviewer authority
is still not proven at the inspected write boundary.

 Strengths

 Desk-local boundaries make the product easier to reason about: the
owner can see where an analyst route ends and an operator route begins.
Explicit variation tiers keep capability growth visible instead of
hiding it in one registry. The medtech analyst route fails explicitly on
missing databases or unrecognized prompts, and the score-list view
degrades cleanly when no persisted scores exist. Safe Mode keeps the
portfolio desk from being mistaken for live holdings.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - Desk-level
navigation material and live service startup show separate desk families
backed by desk-local SQLite services. - The medtech analyst route is
deterministic and read-only, while separate maintenance scripts can
still write local data. - Semiconductors uses variation tiers and an
ordered, best-effort refresh chain that rebuilds from snapshots. -
Portfolio runs in Safe Mode, grows cumulatively across variations, and
has a validation policy that bounds the saved artifact to the local
snapshot and current variations. - The advisory desk has a fallback
score view for genuinely empty history; corrupt score history now blocks
advisory generation and listing.

 Not reviewed: - A verified shared shell or unified router. - External
databases, feeds, snapshots, and schedules that are not part of the
reviewed evidence. - The outer caller or transport boundary that would
control score submission access. - Live freshness, completeness, and
reproducibility beyond the repository-bounded proof.

 Check for a live shared router or shell before upgrading the manual
from desk-first navigation. Rerun the desks’ refresh and rebuild steps
and inspect whether partial snapshots still appear after upstream
failures. Inspect the caller boundary around score submission and
re-check the empty-history policy if missing score history should become
blocking.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 Medtech Desk:
Deterministic Analyst Research

 Medtech is the clearest desk-level example of how this product
appears to work today: an analyst question goes into a deterministic
command path, gets matched to one of six tools, and those tools read
from a desk-local SQLite database. Separate maintenance scripts in the
same desk package can write device records, so the read-only promise
applies to the analyst route, not to every script in the
folder. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 Medtech is the clearest desk-level example of how this product
appears to work today: an analyst question goes into a deterministic
command path, gets matched to one of six tools, and those tools read
from a desk-local SQLite database. Separate maintenance scripts in the
same desk package can write device records, so the read-only promise
applies to the analyst route, not to every script in the folder. This
outline is built from reviewed code, so it shows what the product does
today, not what you mean it to be; that part still needs
confirmation.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 Explain medtech as a bounded analyst research desk rather than a
proof of a whole-platform shell.

 Separate the analyst read path from the maintenance write path and
say which one is actually read-only.

 Name the concrete gates that make the analyst route deterministic
and failure-aware.

 State the evidence boundary clearly: what was verified in the
reviewed code and what was not.

 How To Think About Medtech

 A bounded research desk

 Treat medtech as the clearest example of a desk that answers analyst
questions from its own desk-local SQLite data. That is the right mental
model for this chapter: one bounded research surface, not proof of a
verified product-wide shell. The reviewed runtime evidence points to
separate desk families backed by desk-local SQLite services, while the
shared shell or router suggested by top-level documentation was not
verified in the live surfaces. For an owner, that means the safest
reading is narrow and concrete: this chapter shows what one desk appears
to do, not what the whole workspace must do.

 Research and
maintenance are not the same job

 Keep analyst question handling separate from operator maintenance
work in your head. The analyst path is the part that turns a question
into a database-backed answer, and it is the part this chapter is really
about. Maintenance work sits beside it, not inside it. That separation
matters because it changes how you judge risk: a desk can be dependable
for research while still having a different, write-capable maintenance
lane for keeping the underlying records current. In other words, the
question path is not a general-purpose editing surface, even if the same
desk package also contains scripts that can update device records.

 A simple example makes the boundary clearer. If an analyst asks which
devices match a pattern, the desk should be understood as working from
its own stored data and answering within that research lane. If an
operator is refreshing or correcting device records, that is a different
kind of action with a different consequence for the dataset. Mixing
those two mental models leads to bad expectations: you start treating
every desk action as if it had the same permissions, the same failure
modes, and the same purpose. It does not.

 One exemplar, not a universal
rule

 Read medtech as an exemplar of one bounded desk, not as a promise
that every other desk behaves the same way. The chapter is useful
precisely because it is specific: it gives you a grounded example of how
a desk can support analyst research over local data without claiming
that the rest of the repository shares the same shape. That keeps the
manual honest. It also protects you from a common mistake: assuming that
because one desk looks deterministic and desk-bounded, the whole
workspace has the same navigation model, the same data boundary, or the
same split between read paths and maintenance paths.

 So the owner-level takeaway is restraint. Use medtech to calibrate
your expectation of what a strong desk can look like, but do not promote
it to a platform-wide definition. If a later desk needs a different tool
set, a different data boundary, or a different operating rhythm, this
chapter does not contradict that. It gives you a known-good reference
point for one desk only, with the shared-shell question still open.

 Figure: Treat Medtech as one bounded desk-local
surface. The reviewed runtime supports that narrow reading, so the
manual should not promote a unified shell until live code proves it.

flowchart TD
 A[Medtech desk] --> B[Bounded analyst surface]
 A --> C[Desk-local records]
 D[Shared shell or router] -. not verified in live runtime .-> A
 D -. remains unproven .-> E[Keep the manual desk-level]

 Medtech sits as one desk with its own bounded analyst surface and
desk-local records. A shared shell or router is shown as unverified in
the reviewed runtime. The consequence for the owner is simple: keep the
manual desk-level and do not generalize this chapter into a
whole-product shell claim.

 What The Analyst Route
Actually Does

 Routing Is Narrow

 In the reviewed medtech desk, an analyst prompt does not wander
through a broad shell and hope for the best. It is matched into one of
six analytical tools, and the path is deterministic enough to fail
openly when the prompt does not fit or when the database is missing. For
the owner, that changes the expectation of the desk: this is not a
guess-and-fill system. It is a bounded research route that either
recognizes the request shape or stops. The important boundary is that
this describes the analyst path only; it does not say that every script
shipped with the desk behaves the same way.

 Read-Only Research

 Once the prompt lands in a tool, the tool reads the desk-local SQLite
data through read-only database queries. In other words, the analyst
route is built to inspect existing records, not to change them. That
matters because it gives the owner a cleaner mental contract: an analyst
can ask for a company comparison, a device lookup, or another
evidence-backed answer, and the path is meant to return a result without
mutating the dataset as part of that same flow. A concrete example is a
request for the current device list. The selected tool can read the
stored rows and summarize them, but it is not the route that adds new
rows or refreshes old ones.

 Capability or behavior 
 Analyst route 
 Separate maintenance scripts 

 Prompt handling 
 Matches the prompt into one of six tools; unrecognized input fails
explicitly. 
 Not a prompt route. 

 Database access 
 Reads the desk-local SQLite data with read-only queries. 
 Can write device rows. 

 Operational effect 
 Produces research answers without changing the analyst data
path. 
 Changes desk data during maintenance, outside the analyst question
path. 

 Maintenance Is Separate

 The same desk package also includes separate import scripts that
write device rows. That is the operational split that matters: research
asks questions against the desk data, while maintenance changes the data
outside that path. For the owner, this means the read-only promise
should be read narrowly and correctly. It applies to the analyst route,
not to every script in the folder. If a maintainer runs an import after
updating source material, that job can alter device records; later, the
analyst route can read those records without being the thing that wrote
them. The reviewed evidence establishes the split, but it does not prove
a single shared control surface for both activities.

 Figure: The analyst route is narrow and fail-aware.
A supported request reaches a tool and reads existing records; an
unsupported request or missing records stop the run instead of prompting
a guess.

flowchart TD
 A[Analyst prompt] --> B[Matched to one of six tools]
 B --> C[Read existing desk records]
 C --> D[Research answer]
 A -. not recognized .-> E[Stop openly]
 C -. missing records .-> E

 An analyst prompt enters the desk, is matched to one of six tools,
and the selected tool reads the desk’s stored records before returning a
research answer. If the prompt does not fit or the records are missing,
the route stops openly. The consequence is deterministic research
behavior rather than improvisation.

 What The Review Proved

 What was actually verified

 The review did not prove a broad product-wide shell. What it did
verify was narrower and more useful for the owner: medtech’s reviewed
runtime surfaces are desk-local SQLite services, and the supposed shared
shell or router seen in top-level framing was not verified in the live
runtime. That boundary matters. It means the strongest evidence supports
a desk-bounded reading of medtech, not a claim that the whole workspace
shares one confirmed navigation layer.

 The analyst path is
deterministic

 Within that desk-local surface, the analyst route behaved
deterministically enough to map prompts to tools instead of improvising
a response. The reviewed path routes an analyst prompt into one of six
analytical tools, and it fails explicitly when the prompt is not
recognized or when the database is missing. For an owner, that changes
the reliability story: the system is not pretending to answer when its
input or data is incomplete. In practice, a malformed question is
treated as a failure state, and a missing database is treated as a
missing prerequisite, not as something to guess through.

 A concrete example shows why this matters. If an analyst asks a
question that fits the desk’s supported research patterns, the route can
select a tool and continue against the SQLite-backed data. If the same
desk is opened without the expected database, the reviewed path stops
rather than fabricating an answer. That is a bounded, fail-aware
behavior, and it is one of the clearest facts the review
established.

 Maintenance writes still
exist

 The same desk package also contains separate maintenance scripts that
can write device records. That is a distinct fact from the analyst
route, and it is the main reason the chapter keeps separating research
from upkeep. The reviewed evidence supports the stronger statement that
the analyst path is read-only, while maintenance remains write-capable
inside the package.

 For the owner, the consequence is simple but important: read-only
behavior applies to the analyst research path, not to every script in
the medtech folder. A maintainer can still refresh or import device data
through those separate scripts, so the desk is not an entirely read-only
system. The review did not establish that those writes are exposed
through the analyst route, and it did not prove a unified shell that
would collapse the difference between research and maintenance. The
verified boundary is narrower: analyst questions read, maintenance
scripts can write, and the two paths are intentionally not the same
thing.

 Figure: Keep the read-only promise scoped to the
analyst path. Separate maintenance scripts can still change device
records, so the whole package is not read-only.

flowchart LR
 subgraph A[Read-only analyst path]
 Q[Analyst questions] --> R[Read existing records] --> S[Research answers]
 end
 subgraph M[Separate maintenance lane]
 I[Import scripts] --> W[Write device records]
 end
 M -. separate from .-> A

 One lane is the analyst path, which reads existing records and
returns research answers. A separate maintenance lane can write device
records. The consequence is that read-only behavior stops at the analyst
route; maintenance remains a write-capable exception.

 What Is Solid Here

 Repeatable analyst answers

 The strongest thing in this medtech desk is not that it does
everything, but that it does one thing in a controlled way: it turns an
analyst question into a database-backed answer through a fixed route.
That matters to an owner because it reduces the amount of judgment the
system has to invent on the fly. The question is not handed to a
general-purpose shell and hoped through; it is matched to one of a small
set of analytical tools, and those tools draw from the desk’s SQLite
data. In practice, that gives the desk a predictable shape: the same
kind of request follows the same path, and the answer comes from the
same governed data layer.

 That repeatability is valuable because it makes the desk easier to
trust operationally. If a team asks the same kind of market or device
question twice, they should not be getting two different styles of
answer because the route changed its mind about how to interpret the
request. The reviewed behavior shows a bounded analyst surface, not a
wide-open conversational interface, which is exactly what gives the
product its discipline here. The boundary is important: this is solid
evidence for the medtech analyst route, not proof that every desk in the
workspace is equally controlled or equally deterministic.

 Fail fast instead of
guessing

 The other strength is that the path does not try to hide bad starting
conditions. When the database is missing or the request does not map to
a recognized analytical tool, the route fails explicitly rather than
guessing. That is a better owner outcome than a system that silently
fabricates a partial answer, because a visible failure tells the
operator or analyst that the run did not actually complete. It keeps bad
entry states from being mistaken for valid research.

 This matters because the worst failure mode in research tooling is
often not a hard stop, but a plausible-looking answer built on the wrong
assumptions. The medtech route avoids that trap by making the error
state part of the behavior. If the desk cannot open the data it expects,
or cannot place the question into its known tool set, it stops early.
The limitation is just as important as the strength: fail-fast behavior
improves visibility, but it does not by itself prove that the underlying
data is complete, fresh, or exhaustive.

 Clean separation of reads
and writes

 A third strength is the separation between analyst research and
maintenance work. The analyst path is read-only, while separate
maintenance scripts can still write device records. For an owner, that
split is cleaner than combining research and data refresh in one
uncontrolled path, because it reduces the chance that a normal
question-answering flow mutates the desk’s data by accident. The analyst
gets a stable read surface; the operator keeps the write power in a
different lane.

 That separation improves both confidence and responsibility. Analysts
can use the desk without worrying that their queries are altering device
data, and operators can refresh or import data without forcing that work
through the research route. A concrete example: an analyst asks for a
comparison and gets a result from the desk database; later, an operator
runs a maintenance import that updates device rows, but that write
happens outside the analyst path and does not change the read-only
guarantee of the research route itself. The qualifier is that this
cleanliness applies to the reviewed medtech package as observed, not as
a blanket promise about every script or every desk in the
repository.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - Desk-level
navigation evidence showing separate desk families backed by desk-local
SQLite services, with no verified shared shell or router. - The medtech
analyst command path, the desk service that opens SQLite, the six
analyst tools, and the separate maintenance import scripts that can
write device records.

 Not reviewed: - A verified shared shell or router in live runtime
code. - Any outer UI, transport, or auth wrapper beyond the reviewed
analyst route. - Live databases, snapshots, or runtime state outside the
reviewed code. - Owner-confirmed product intent for how this desk should
be framed.

 If a shared router is later verified, widen the navigation claims
then. If new medtech tools or import scripts appear, recheck the analyst
route and the write paths before broadening any read-only statement.
Keep runtime completeness claims out unless live data assets are
explicitly verified.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 Semiconductors Desk:
Workflow Variations

 This chapter shows the semiconductors desk as the reviewed code
presents it today: a tiered set of variations that starts with baseline
market, vendor, price, and search work, then adds comparison and
concentration, catalyst notes, SOP runs, plotting, and interactive HTML
research packs. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter shows the semiconductors desk as the reviewed code
presents it today: a tiered set of variations that starts with baseline
market, vendor, price, and search work, then adds comparison and
concentration, catalyst notes, SOP runs, plotting, and interactive HTML
research packs. That matters because the desk is built from the code, so
it tells you what it does today, not what you mean it to be, and the
cross-desk shell implied by top-level docs is still not verified
here.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 Explain that semiconductors is a tiered workflow suite, and how that
differs from the narrower medtech analyst route.

 Name which capabilities belong to the early, middle, and later tiers
without flattening them into one bundle.

 Explain why a refresh can complete and still leave partial snapshots
behind.

 Separate verified desk-local behavior from unverified runtime
assumptions, especially around shared navigation and generated
outputs.

 What This Desk Is

 The semiconductors desk is best understood as a packaged family of
variations, not a single loop that happens to grow more features over
time. That distinction matters because the reviewed materials do not
describe one flat research path; they describe a desk whose capabilities
are grouped into tiers, and each tier changes what the analyst can do
without erasing the earlier baseline. For the owner, the practical
consequence is that a request to use semiconductors is a request to
enter a particular workflow family, with a scope that is broader than a
bare search-and-read routine.

 The unit of meaning
is the workflow family

 The useful mental model is a family of related research actions:
baseline analysis first, then comparison and concentration work, then
catalyst notes, then SOP runs, then plotting, then HTML research packs.
These are not just stylistic variations on the same move. They represent
distinct ways the desk packages work for different research needs. In
one context, the analyst may only need the baseline market and vendor
picture; in another, the owner may want the desk to progress into
comparison, written notes, a repeatable operating procedure, or a
presentation-ready output.

 This is why the desk should not be read as one research loop with
extra output formats. The earlier tiers establish the base research
surface, but the later tiers widen what the desk can express. A plot is
not the same thing as a catalyst note, and an HTML pack is not the same
thing as a plain comparison. The owner’s consequence is simple: when you
choose semiconductors, you are choosing a research suite that can move
from discovery to interpretation to packaged output within one desk
family, rather than forcing every task through the same narrow path.

 Broader than medtech

 Compared with medtech’s narrower read-only analyst route,
semiconductors covers a broader spread of owner-relevant research
actions. Medtech is useful as a contrast because it keeps the analyst
path tightly bounded. Semiconductors goes further: it includes not only
baseline research, but also comparison and concentration work,
note-making, repeated operating runs, plotting, and HTML research packs.
The owner-facing difference is breadth. In semiconductors, the desk is
not only answering questions; it can also shape, package, and stage the
research in more forms.

 That breadth does not make semiconductors a universal template. It is
the clearest live example of a tiered research suite in the reviewed
materials, but that is a statement about the evidence we have, not a
claim about the rest of the workspace. The reviewed live surfaces are
desk-local, and the shared shell or router implied by top-level
documentation was not verified in the runtime reviewed here. So the safe
reading is: semiconductors clearly behaves like a tiered suite in the
evidence we have, and the manual should not assume every other desk
follows the same pattern unless its own evidence proves it.

 A concrete owner scenario

 Suppose the owner asks an analyst to prepare a briefing on a supplier
change in the semiconductor chain. The desk may begin with baseline
analysis to establish the market picture. If the question sharpens, the
analyst can move into comparison and concentration work to separate the
strongest vendors from the rest. If the owner needs a traceable
narrative, catalyst notes can capture the why behind the shift. If the
work needs to be repeated or reviewed later, SOP runs make that a
distinct tier rather than an ad hoc rerun. If the briefing needs a
visual, plotting and HTML packs give the desk ways to package the result
for others.

 What changes for the owner is not just the format of the output, but
the shape of the research itself. You are not asking for one static
answer. You are selecting a desk family that can travel through several
research forms as the question matures. The boundary is that this is
still desk-local behavior, not a promise about every product surface in
the repository. The semiconductors desk is the clearest live example of
a tiered research suite in the reviewed materials, and this chapter
treats it that way because the evidence supports it. But that strength
should stay local: it is a model for understanding this desk, not a rule
to impose on all others.

 Figure: The desk does not swap one workflow for
another. It keeps the baseline in place and layers later families on
top, so the owner can ask for deeper analysis or packaged output without
losing the earlier research floor.

flowchart LR
 A["What stays"]
 B["Baseline research"]
 C["What gets added"]
 D["Comparison and concentration"]
 E["Catalyst notes"]
 F["SOP runs"]
 G["Plots"]
 H["HTML packs"]
 A --> B
 C --> D
 C --> E
 C --> F
 C --> G
 C --> H
 B -. "still available" .-> C

 The diagram separates what stays from what gets added. Baseline
research remains available, and later families add comparison and
concentration, catalyst notes, SOP runs, plots, and HTML packs. The
consequence is cumulative growth: later tiers expand the desk without
replacing the earlier tools.

 What Each Tier Adds

 At the semiconductors desk, later variations do not replace earlier
ones. The reviewed shape is cumulative: each tier adds new capability on
top of the baseline rather than swapping the baseline out. For the
owner, that means the variation number is a real boundary of promise. It
tells you what is newly available in that slice of the desk, while the
earlier tools remain the floor underneath it.

 Variation tier 
 What it adds 

 Baseline analytics 
 Core market, vendor, price, and search work. 

 Comparison and concentration 
 Comparison that can line up alternate names and concentration
views. 

 Catalyst notes 
 Write-and-verify catalyst-note work. 

 SOP runs 
 Persisted SOP runs for repeatable research paths. 

 Plotting 
 Plotting outputs for visual analysis. 

 Interactive HTML research packs 
 Interactive HTML packs for interactive review and sharing. 

 Reading the progression

 A useful way to read the sequence is by the kind of result each tier
makes possible. The baseline tier gives the analyst ordinary research
tools. The comparison and concentration tier adds the ability to line up
related companies or names instead of treating each search in isolation.
Catalyst notes change the desk again: the workflow is no longer only
about retrieving facts, but about writing and checking a research note
that can be revisited. SOP runs then make that path persistent, so the
work can be repeated rather than recreated from scratch. Plotting turns
the same research stream into a visual output, and the HTML pack tier
packages the result into something interactive.

 The owner consequence is straightforward: the later tiers broaden
both the research process and the artifact that comes out of it. A user
starting from the baseline can stay in a lighter workflow, but a user
who needs a comparative read, a documented note, a repeatable procedure,
a chart, or a browsable pack moves into a later tier instead of a
different desk. That is the main operational meaning of the tiering: it
grows the desk by layering outputs, not by retiring earlier ones.

 Refresh Order

 The refresh path is staged in a fixed order. Normalization runs
first, then upstream pulls, then the local database rebuild. That order
matters because each stage depends on the previous one: the desk tries
to shape incoming material before it fetches fresh source data, and only
after that does it rebuild the local SQLite state from the snapshot
files. For the operator, the refresh is therefore a pipeline, not a
single irreversible event.

 Best-Effort Completion

 The same review also shows that refresh is best-effort rather than
atomic. Individual pull failures do not stop the whole chain, so a run
can still reach the rebuild step even when some upstream pulls did not
succeed. The consequence is that a completed refresh does not prove
complete upstream coverage. It proves that the pipeline advanced through
rebuild, but the rebuilt state only reflects the snapshot files that
were actually written.

 A concrete example is a source that is unavailable during the pull
stage. The refresh can continue, normalize what it already has, and
finish the rebuild anyway. That is useful because the desk keeps moving
instead of failing fast on one source, but it also sets a boundary for
the owner: a successful run is not the same thing as perfect freshness,
and it should not be read that way.

 Figure: Refresh is a staged pipeline, not an
all-or-nothing switch. Because rebuild only consumes the snapshots that
were actually written, a finished run can still reflect partial upstream
coverage.

flowchart TD
 A["Normalize incoming material"] --> B["Pull source updates"]
 B --> C["Keep going after one source fails"]
 C --> D["Write snapshot files"]
 D --> E["Rebuild local state from snapshots"]

 The diagram shows a staged refresh path. Incoming material is
normalized first, then source updates are pulled, then the run keeps
going even if one source fails, then snapshot files are written, and
finally the local state is rebuilt from those snapshots. The consequence
is that a refresh can complete without proving that every upstream
source was covered.

 What The Review Established

 Eight variation
families, one tiered shape

 The reviewed semiconductor materials do not describe one flat
research loop. The README names eight variation families, and the
reviewed modules line up with that progression from the first variation
through the eighth. For an owner, the important fact is not just the
count; it is the structure. Each later step is presented as a separate
package of capability, so the desk grows by addition rather than by
renaming the same baseline work.

 That matters because it makes the boundary of each stage inspectable.
A change in the later families is not a silent background tweak to the
whole desk. It is a new declared lane with its own purpose. In practical
terms, if the desk gains a comparison-focused family or a plotting
family, that is evidence that the desk now reaches a different kind of
output, not merely the same output with a different label.

 Later tiers are distinct
additions

 The review also established that the later tiers are not copies of
the same tool set. Comparison and concentration, catalyst notes, SOP
runs, plotting, and HTML research packs appear as distinct additions.
That distinction matters because it tells the owner where new value
comes from: each family expands the desk in a different direction,
rather than repeating the baseline research path.

 The consequence is a cleaner reading of capability. A later family
should be understood as a new research surface or output form, not as a
duplicate of an earlier one. For example, a plotting family is there to
turn the desk’s work into a visual artifact, while an HTML pack is there
to present research in an interactive package. Those are materially
different outcomes, so the owner should not expect one family to stand
in for the others.

 The boundary is equally important. The review supports that these
families exist as separate additions, but it does not prove that every
desk follows this exact layout. This is a strong semiconductor-specific
pattern, not a universal rule for the rest of the workspace.

 Refresh writes
snapshots before rebuild

 The refresh path is also clear enough to state with confidence. The
reviewed scripts write CSV snapshots before the SQLite rebuild happens.
Normalization runs first, then source pulls, then the rebuild step
repopulates from those snapshots. The order matters because it shows
where the usable intermediate state lives: the CSVs are not incidental
byproducts, they are the handoff point for the rebuild.

 For the owner, that means a refresh can make progress even when the
final rebuild has not yet completed. Imagine an operator refreshing the
desk and one source pull fails for a single ticker. The run can still
leave behind partial snapshot files, and the later rebuild can still be
driven from whatever was captured. That is useful operationally, but it
also means freshness is not atomic. A completed run does not
automatically imply complete upstream coverage.

 The review does not establish a stronger guarantee than that. It
shows an ordered, best-effort chain, not an all-or-nothing refresh
contract.

 What is and is not
proven about navigation

 Finally, the reviewed runtime does not prove a shared cross-desk
shell. The safest live statement is desk-local behavior: the evidence
supports separate desk families backed by desk-local SQLite services,
while the shared shell or router implied by top-level docs remains
unverified in the reviewed runtime.

 That boundary matters for how the owner reads the workspace. It is
safe to treat the semiconductor desk as a verified local unit with its
own variation structure and refresh behavior. It is not safe, from this
review alone, to assume a common navigation layer that binds all desks
together in one confirmed runtime surface. If a user expects to move
between desks through a single shared shell, that may be true in
documentation, but it is not proven here.

 So the most exact live claim is narrower: the semiconductor desk’s
variation tiers and refresh chain are verified, while the broader
cross-desk navigation story is still provisional.

 Figure: Only the desk-local surface is verified in
the reviewed runtime. The broader shared navigation story remains
provisional, so the manual should stay scoped to the desk instead of
promising a confirmed unified cockpit.

flowchart TD
 A["Reviewed evidence"] --> B["Desk-local service"]
 A -. "not proven here" .-> C["Shared shell or router"]
 B --> D["Keep the manual at desk level"]
 C --> D

 The diagram shows reviewed evidence pointing to a desk-local service,
while the shared shell or router is marked as not proven here. Both
paths lead to the same conclusion: keep the manual scoped to the desk.
The consequence is that the broader navigation layer should not be
described as verified from this evidence alone.

 What Is Solid

 Clear boundaries

 The strongest thing about this desk is that its capability boundaries
are named well enough to inspect without guessing. The reviewed
semiconductors materials do not describe one vague research bundle; they
lay out a tiered set of variation families, and the later families are
distinct additions rather than hidden copies of the same idea. That
matters for an owner because you can tell, from the structure alone,
which kinds of work belong to the baseline, which belong to comparison
and concentration, and which belong to later work such as catalyst
notes, SOP runs, plotting, and HTML packs. The boundary is also the
limit: explicit tiering does not mean every variation has the same
reach, and it does not prove that every output is available in every
run.

 Failure does not stop the
chain

 The refresh path is also solid in a specific way: it keeps moving
after upstream trouble instead of disguising it as success. The reviewed
flow is ordered, with normalization first, then source pulls, then the
database rebuild, and individual ticker-level failures do not abort the
whole sequence. For the owner, that changes the operational posture. A
refresh can still complete enough of the work to leave behind usable
snapshots even when one source or one ticker misbehaves, which is better
than a brittle all-or-nothing run. The qualifier is just as important:
this is best-effort behavior, not atomic freshness. A completed refresh
does not prove that every source succeeded or that the resulting
snapshots are complete.

 A concrete example is a run where most semiconductor names refresh
normally, but one ticker fails during the source pull. Under this
pattern, the operator still gets the later steps, the snapshots still
rebuild, and the desk can still surface whatever was successfully
captured. What the owner should not infer is that the failed ticker was
handled cleanly or that the final snapshot represents every upstream
source equally well. The strength is resilience, not certainty.

 Outputs
stay attached to the tier that produced them

 The variation structure is especially useful because it makes the
output story legible. Since the desk is split into named families, it is
easier to see which artifacts came from baseline research, which came
from comparison work, which came from later plotting or HTML packaging,
and which came from intermediate workflow stages such as catalyst notes
or SOP runs. That makes the desk easier to operate and easier to audit.
An owner looking at a result does not have to reverse-engineer which
layer produced it; the tiering itself acts as the map.

 This does not make the desk perfectly uniform. It means the desk’s
packaging helps prevent a common failure mode in workflow products,
where every result looks like it came from the same tool even though
different tiers are doing different jobs. Here, the structure keeps
those differences visible.

 Broader than the
narrower analyst route

 Compared with the medtech analyst route, this desk gives the owner a
broader and more expressive workflow story. The medtech path is a fixed,
read-only route through a small set of analytical tools, so it is good
at deterministic research but narrow in scope. The semiconductors desk
goes further: it spans multiple workflow families and includes
later-stage outputs rather than stopping at query and readback. That
gives the owner more room to support real research progression, from
baseline analysis into comparison, note-taking, runs, plots, and
packaged research outputs.

 The boundary here is not that broader is automatically better. A
narrower route can be easier to reason about when the task is simple.
The point is that semiconductors is deliberately more expressive, and
the reviewed materials support that reading. For an owner, that means
the desk can carry more of the research journey inside one packaging
model instead of handing every step off to a separate path.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - The semiconductors
desk README and variation implementations were reviewed for the tier
structure and named capability families. - The semiconductors refresh
scripts were reviewed for the order of source normalization, source
pulls, and database rebuilds. - The medtech desk route was reviewed as a
contrast case for a narrower read-only analyst path. - The repository
navigation docs were reviewed only enough to confirm that a shared
cross-desk shell is not yet proven.

 Not reviewed: - Any live cross-desk shell outside the reviewed
runtime. - Any external data snapshots, feeds, or generated files that
are not present in the repository evidence. - Whether plotting and
interactive HTML outputs are fully available in the deployed
environment. - Owner-confirmed intent for how this desk should be
positioned in the product.

 Recheck the semiconductors desk README against a live runtime, run
the refresh path end to end with at least one known upstream failure,
and verify the plotting and HTML-pack outputs in the deployed
environment before describing them as reliable owner-facing outputs. If
a shared cross-desk shell appears, move navigation language out of
desk-local framing.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 OSAT Desk: AMKR
Intelligence and Review Gates

 This chapter is about the OSAT desk: the AMKR-focused desk that
pulls company facts, filings, news, job postings, and prices into local
data, then uses saved review scores to decide whether advisory
hypotheses can still be generated. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter is about the OSAT desk: the AMKR-focused desk that pulls
company facts, filings, news, job postings, and prices into local data,
then uses saved review scores to decide whether advisory hypotheses can
still be generated. The important owner signal is not just that the desk
refreshes data, but that the score log is part of the control boundary:
missing history is an empty unscored state, corrupt history now blocks,
and the score submission path accepts reviewer and gate values from the
caller. That means the desk can look controlled on paper while still
depending on persistence and an unverified caller boundary. This is
built from the code, so it shows what your product does today, not what
you mean it to be; that part is yours to confirm.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 Explain OSAT as a bounded AMKR intelligence desk with separate
refresh and review-state layers.

 Describe what happens when upstream pulls fail or the refresh
environment is missing its expected header value.

 Explain when advisory generation is blocked, including the new
corrupt-score-history block and the remaining empty-history policy.

 Separate the verified in-repo score-log behavior from the
still-unverified caller boundary.

 How to Think About the OSAT
Desk

 A bounded desk, not a
platform

 Think of OSAT as a narrow AMKR company-intelligence desk first and
anything larger only if later evidence proves it. The reviewed runtime
does not verify a shared shell or router at the top of the product; what
it does verify is desk-local behavior, with separate desk families
backed by their own local services. That matters for an owner because it
changes what you can safely assume. A working OSAT desk does not mean
the whole workspace has one shared navigation model, one shared identity
layer, or one shared operating pattern. Until those gaps are closed,
OSAT should be read as a bounded desk with its own local rules, not as
proof of a general cross-desk platform.

 A concrete way to picture it: an operator can refresh the desk and
still not have evidence that another desk, or the workspace navigation
around it, behaves the same way. The scope is intentionally smaller than
a platform claim.

 Refresh data
is not the same as advisory control

 Keep the refresh path and the reviewer-gated advisory path in
separate mental boxes. The refresh side is about pulling source material
and rebuilding local data; the advisory side is about whether the desk
is allowed to produce later guidance from the saved review state. Those
are different control layers, and they fail differently. A source pull
can be best effort and still leave partial but usable data, while the
advisory gate depends on saved score state that can be missing or
unreadable. In the current implementation, missing score state remains
an empty unscored state, while corrupted score state now blocks later
hypothesis generation instead of collapsing into an empty set.

 For the owner, the consequence is simple but important: fresh data
does not automatically mean constrained advisory output. A desk can look
operational on the refresh side and still be permissive on the review
side if persisted score state is absent or broken. That is a real
boundary, not a theoretical one. If score history exists but is corrupt,
the local implementation now blocks advisory generation until the score
history is inspected and repaired or archived.

 Authority is only partly
pinned down

 There is also a split between the saved review state and the
authority that writes it. The reviewed score-writing path accepts
reviewer and gate choices from the caller, and the inspected path does
not show a check that the caller itself is the right person. At the same
time, the outer entry point that would confirm who can reach that write
step was not reviewed here. So the safest owner model is not “reviewer
authority is enforced end to end,” but “the desk stores reviewer and
gate choices, while enforcement at the outer boundary remains
unverified.”

 That distinction matters because it tells you where confidence stops.
The desk-local code can show that review decisions are persisted and
later consulted, but it does not by itself prove that only an authorized
reviewer can supply those decisions. In practice, that means the desk
should be treated as having a meaningful review state, not a fully
proven trust boundary.

 Where the evidence ceiling
sits

 The right mental model, then, is a bounded desk with two layers of
control and a few missing edges. We know enough to say OSAT is
AMKR-focused, desk-local, and review-gated in intent and in parts of its
behavior. We do not know enough to promote it to a general workspace
pattern, or to claim the caller boundary and shared navigation are fully
settled. Until those gaps are closed, the manual should stay scoped to
what the reviewed desk-local evidence actually shows.

 Figure: OSAT should be read as a desk-local AMKR
intelligence surface with separate desk families; the reviewed runtime
does not prove a shared shell or router.

flowchart TD
 A[OSAT desk] --> B[AMKR intelligence work]
 A --> C[Desk-local services]
 A -. not proven .-> D[Shared shell or router]
 D --> E[Unverified boundary]

 OSAT is a desk-local AMKR intelligence surface that connects to AMKR
work and desk-local services. The shared shell or router is shown as
unproven, so the owner should treat a unified cross-desk navigation
layer as still unverified.

 Refresh, Score, and Decide

 Refresh comes before rebuild

 The refresh path is not a single atomic sweep. It runs source pulls
first, then rebuilds the local data from what those pulls produced. That
order matters because the rebuild is downstream of the fetches: if an
upstream source warns, is missing an expected environment value, or
fails on one part of the chain, the refresh does not stop at the first
problem. It keeps moving and writes whatever partial snapshot the
earlier steps made available.

 For an owner, the practical effect is that refresh is best-effort
rather than all-or-nothing. You should read a successful run as “the
desk tried the full chain and rebuilt from the sources it managed to
collect,” not as a guarantee that every upstream source was complete. In
a live operator scenario, that means one failed source does not
necessarily freeze the whole desk. The boundary is also important: this
evidence shows the order and the continuation behavior, but it does not
establish that the resulting snapshot is fully fresh or complete in
every run.

 Advisory state is
read from persisted scores

 The desk’s advisory behavior hangs off persisted score state, not
just the latest request. Before later hypotheses can be generated, the
code consults what has already been stored. Missing score state remains
an empty unscored state, but unreadable or non-list score history now
blocks generation and listing until the file is inspected and repaired
or archived.

 That distinction matters because it changes what ‘blocked’ means in
practice. A stored no-go decision suppresses later hypotheses, and
corrupt persistence now blocks instead of silently reopening the gate.
Empty history still means no review decision has been recorded; whether
that should also block is an owner policy decision.

 State 
 Score-list result 
 Gate state / advisory effect 

 Missing or empty score file 
 Zero rows, plus the current gate state 
 The desk stays open because empty state does not trigger a
block. 

 Populated score file 
 Rows returned in reverse order, trimmed to the requested limit 
 The latest persisted gate state governs whether later advisory
generation can proceed. 

 Corrupt or non-list persisted score log 
 Blocked unreadable state 
 Advisory generation and score listing block until the score history
is inspected and repaired or archived. 

 Read that table as a control story, not just a display rule. When the
score file is present and populated, the desk can surface a bounded
history of scored entries and apply the persisted gate. When the file is
absent or empty, the view degrades to a no-rows state without collapsing
the whole desk. When the file is unreadable, the path now blocks. The
remaining owner decision is whether genuinely missing score history
should remain an empty state or become a hard gate.

 Score writes trust the
caller boundary

 The write path is equally important because it shows where authority
is and is not enforced. The inspected score writer accepts reviewer and
gate values from the caller, stores them, and verifies that the file was
written by reading it back. What it does not show is an identity check
at the body boundary. So the persisted review record reflects the values
the caller supplied, not an independently proven reviewer identity.

 For an owner, that means the review system’s trust model is only as
strong as the outer transport or access wrapper around it, and that
outer boundary was not verified in this snapshot. The safe reading is
narrower than “anyone can edit it,” because reachability was not
inspected; but it is still wider than “the writer itself enforces
reviewer authority.” In other words, the desk confirms persistence, not
legitimacy. Until the caller boundary is verified, the manual should
treat the score writer as accepting caller-provided review metadata
rather than as a self-authenticating gate.

 Figure: Refresh is staged and best-effort: source
pulls run before rebuild, and individual failures do not stop the chain
from writing a partial snapshot.

flowchart TD
 A[Start refresh] --> B[Pull sources]
 B --> C[Company facts]
 C --> D[Filings]
 D --> E[News]
 E --> F[Job postings]
 F --> G[Prices]
 G --> H[Rebuild local data]
 C -. warning or failure .-> H
 D -. warning or failure .-> H
 E -. warning or failure .-> H
 F -. warning or failure .-> H
 G -. warning or failure .-> H

 A refresh starts by pulling sources in order, then rebuilds local
data from what those pulls produced. If one source warns or fails, the
run can still continue to the rebuild step, so the desk may finish with
a partial snapshot instead of stopping outright.

 Figure: A populated score log can carry a blocking
review state. Missing score history remains an empty state; unreadable
score persistence now blocks later hypotheses until repaired.

flowchart LR
 subgraph L[Populated score state]
 A[Score rows present] --> B[Latest review state]
 B --> C[Blocking review state]
 C --> D[Later hypotheses stay blocked]
 end
 subgraph R[Missing or unreadable score state]
 E[No usable score log] --> F[Empty score state]
 F --> G[Later hypotheses remain open]
 end

 When score rows are present, the latest review state can be blocking
and later hypotheses stay blocked. When the score log is missing or
unreadable, the desk falls back to an empty score state, and later
hypotheses remain open instead of being blocked.

 Figure: The score writer persists caller-supplied
reviewer and gate decision values and verifies only that the file was
written back; the outer caller identity boundary remains unverified.

flowchart TD
 A[Caller reaches score write] --> B[Supplies reviewer and gate decision]
 B --> C[Writer stores the submitted review state]
 C --> D[Writer reads it back to confirm persistence]
 A -. outer identity check not proven .-> E[Unverified caller boundary]

 The score write path accepts reviewer and gate decision values from
the caller, stores them, and reads them back to confirm the file was
written. What is not proven is the outer caller identity boundary, so
the owner should treat the write path as persistent but not
self-authenticating.

 What This Snapshot Proves

 The refresh chain
is fixed and multi-source

 The reviewed evidence proves that the refresh path does not rely on a
single market feed. It pulls company facts from SEC sources, then SEC
filings, then Google News RSS, then job postings, and then Stooq prices
before the rebuild step runs. That order matters because it tells the
owner what kind of freshness the desk can actually claim: it is
assembling a local intelligence snapshot from several upstream inputs
first, and only after those pulls does it move into rebuilding the desk
data.

 The practical consequence is that a failed upstream pull does not
erase the existence of the chain; it leaves the refresh in a partial
state that still reflects the order the desk tried to follow. That is
useful for operator reasoning, because it shows where missing evidence
can enter the system. The boundary is equally important: the snapshot
proves the sequence and the presence of those sources, but it does not
prove those sources were complete, current, or equally reliable at the
time of every run.

 Empty score state does not
hard-fail

 The score-list helper has a verified empty-state path. When no score
file exists, or when the file is empty, the helper does not collapse
into an error path. It returns no score rows and keeps reporting the
current gate state instead. That is a meaningful design choice for the
owner because it means the desk can still show its present review
posture even when there is nothing persisted to list.

 This matters because an empty or missing score log is not treated as
a system failure in the evidence we reviewed. The desk therefore remains
readable in a blank state, which is better than hiding the gate behind
an exception. The limit is that this proof is about the helper’s
behavior in the cases the evidence covered; it does not establish what
every surrounding view or caller does with that result.

 The
score writer is present, but the caller boundary is not closed

 The reviewed variation four bundle includes the score writer, and
that writer re-reads the saved data after it writes it. That reread step
is the strongest sign in this snapshot that the write is meant to be
persistent rather than merely assembled in memory. It also means the
desk has a local check that the stored score state can be read back
after submission.

 What this snapshot does not prove is the outer caller boundary. The
evidence shows the body of the writer and what it stores, but it does
not verify the full path that decides who is allowed to reach that body
in the first place. So the owner can trust that the writer persists and
confirms its own output, but should not read that as proof that caller
identity is enforced at the edge. The difference is important: a
well-behaved writer can still sit behind a weaker entry point.

 Navigation stays desk-local

 No verified shared shell or router was found in the reviewed runtime
evidence. That means the safest proven reading of the product is still
desk-local navigation, not a confirmed unified cockpit across desks. The
top-level documentation may suggest a broader shared frame, but this
snapshot does not close that gap.

 For the owner, the consequence is simple: the desk should be
described and reasoned about as its own visible surface until a shared
navigation layer is actually verified in live code. That avoids
overstating how much of the workspace is truly unified. The boundary is
not that a shared shell is impossible; it is that this evidence set did
not establish one, so the manual should not pretend it did.

 What Looks Solid

 Clear refresh order

 The strongest part of the desk is that its refresh flow is explicit
about sequence and about how it behaves when something upstream goes
wrong. Sources are pulled before the rebuild step, and the path is
written to keep moving after warnings or individual source failures
rather than pretending every refresh is all-or-nothing. For an operator,
that matters because the desk is easier to reason about in the real
world: if one feed is late or a source pull only produces partial
output, the refresh does not stop being useful just because the ideal
path was interrupted.

 The practical effect is that the operator can tell the difference
between “the desk ran” and “every source was perfect”. That is a useful
boundary. It means the desk favors continuity over ceremonial
completeness, which is usually the right tradeoff for a research
workflow that depends on outside feeds. The qualifier is equally
important: this is best-effort behavior, not proof of atomic freshness.
A refresh can still leave partial but usable snapshots, so the owner
should read the result as resilient, not magically complete.

 Empty state that still
says something

 The score-list behavior is also well-shaped for day-to-day use. When
no score file is present, or when it is empty, the desk does not
collapse into an error state. Instead, it returns no score rows and
still reports the current gate state. That gives the reviewer or
operator a stable surface even when there is no history to show.

 This matters because an empty desk is not the same thing as a broken
desk. In a real review cycle, there will be times when scoring has not
started yet, or when persistence has been reset. In that case, the user
still needs to know whether the desk currently considers the gate open
or closed. A simple example is a new AMKR review run: the score list may
be blank on the first day, but the gate state still tells the reviewer
whether advisory generation is currently being held back or allowed
through. The boundary is that this tells you the visible state of the
desk, not that the underlying review process has been fully
validated.

 What is confirmed, and what
is not

 The reviewed evidence is also clean about scope. It clearly separates
desk-local behavior that is confirmed here from the parts that remain
unverified, especially shared navigation and the outer caller boundary
around score submission. That separation is a strength because it
prevents the manual from overstating control that has not been
demonstrated in the reviewed runtime.

 For the owner, the consequence is straightforward: you can trust the
desk-local refresh and score-list behavior as observed, but you should
not assume the surrounding shell or the caller enforcement story is
equally settled. The practical risk is not hidden inside the desk; it
sits at the boundary. A score write may accept reviewer and gate values
from the caller, and the reviewed evidence does not prove that an outer
wrapper blocks unauthorized access before that point. Likewise, the
broader navigation shape remains desk-local in the evidence rather than
proven as one shared shell. That is not a flaw in the sectioned desk
behavior itself. It is a useful limit on how far the confirmed story can
be stretched.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - The OSAT refresh
chain and its best-effort failure handling. - The advisory gate logic
that reads persisted score state. - The score-list fallback behavior
when score files are missing or empty. - The score submission path that
writes reviewer and gate values. - The desk-local service shape already
established by the broader reviewed evidence.

 Not reviewed: - Any shared shell or router implementation. - Any
outer user interface, API wrapper, or authorization layer around score
submission. - Any live external data source beyond the repository
evidence. - Any runtime state outside the reviewed snapshot.

 Reverify the refresh path by tracing a failed upstream pull through
the next rebuild; reverify the gate if the empty-history policy changes;
reverify caller authority by inspecting the outer entry point that
invokes score submission; reverify navigation only if a shared shell or
router is later confirmed in live runtime code.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 Portfolio Desk:
Safe-Mode Research Workflows

 This chapter is built from the reviewed docs and runtime
evidence, so it shows what the portfolio desk does today, not what you
may intend it to be. The verified picture is a safe-mode portfolio desk
with sanitized data: private holdings, account numbers, transactions,
and balances were removed. 

 One-Minute Snapshot

 This chapter is built from the reviewed docs and runtime evidence, so
it shows what the portfolio desk does today, not what you may intend it
to be. The verified picture is a safe-mode portfolio desk with sanitized
data: private holdings, account numbers, transactions, and balances were
removed. The tool set grows by variation tier instead of arriving all at
once, so the real question for you is which tier you are looking at and
whether you want it kept in mock, sanitized mode.

 What You Should Be Able To
Explain

 Explain why the portfolio desk should be read as one bounded desk
inside a wider workspace, not as the whole product identity.

 Explain what Safe Mode means here in plain owner terms: sanitized
portfolio logic, not live holdings.

 Explain how variation tiers change the tool bundle and why later
tiers should not be assumed to exist in earlier ones.

 How to Think About the
Portfolio Desk

 A desk, not the whole product

 Think of the portfolio area as one bounded desk inside a larger
workspace, not as proof that the whole product shares one common front
door. The reviewed runtime did not verify a single shared shell or
router, even though the top-level material still talks in unified terms.
For an owner, that matters because it limits how much you can generalize
from this desk: what is true here is safe to treat as desk-local unless
another reviewed surface proves it applies more widely.

 A simple way to picture the boundary is this: you are looking at one
research desk that has its own live surface and its own rules of
exposure, but not a confirmed workspace-wide navigation layer. That
means the safest mental model is “one desk, one evidence base”. If you
later discover another desk with different behavior, the portfolio desk
does not automatically tell you how that other desk works. It only tells
you what this bounded portfolio workspace reveals.

 Safe Mode means
sanitized portfolio logic

 Safe Mode here is not a cosmetic label. The evidence says the
portfolio desk was sanitized by removing private holdings, account
numbers, transactions, and balances. In owner terms, that means you
should read the desk as mock portfolio logic with sensitive portfolio
detail stripped out, not as a live holdings system.

 The consequence is practical: output from this desk can be useful for
understanding workflow shape, tiered capability, and research behavior,
but it should not be mistaken for a production account view. A report
may look portfolio-shaped and still be intentionally incomplete because
the sensitive parts were removed. The boundary matters because it
protects you from over-reading the desk as if it were connected to real
customer assets. What the evidence establishes is the removal of those
sensitive categories; it does not establish every possible portfolio
field or every downstream use that might have been preserved.

 For example, if an analyst sees a portfolio summary in Safe Mode, the
right interpretation is “this shows the desk’s logic with sensitive data
sanitized,” not “this is an authoritative live account snapshot.” That
distinction changes how you rely on it: good for structure, comparisons,
and workflow testing, but not for operational decisions that require
live balances.

 Variation adds capability
in layers

 The portfolio desk also has a cumulative shape. Capability does not
arrive all at once; it expands by variation tier, and later tiers build
on earlier ones instead of replacing them. That means each tier should
be read as an additive package: the earlier capability remains the base,
and later variation layers append more tools on top.

 For an owner, this is the important mental shortcut: do not assume
that a higher tier simply renames the desk or swaps the whole bundle.
The reviewed evidence shows a progression from smaller to larger tool
sets, with later variation adding to the exported registry rather than
starting from scratch. In other words, the desk grows by accretion. That
makes tier number meaningful, because it signals how much of the desk
has been built out and what level of capability you should expect to
see.

 The boundary is equally important. Because the tiers are cumulative,
you should not infer that every deployment or snapshot includes the same
bundle. A claim about a later tier is not automatically a claim about an
earlier one. If you are evaluating the desk in practice, the owner
question is always: which variation am I looking at, and what was added
there that was not present before? A later-tier example might include
watchlist or alert-related behavior that simply does not exist in the
earlier package. That is a packaging difference, not a
contradiction.

 Taken together, these three ideas give you the durable picture: a
desk-local portfolio surface, deliberately sanitized into Safe Mode,
with capability layered by variation. That is the right frame for
interpreting the rest of the chapter without turning this desk into the
identity of the whole workspace.

 Figure: Because the sensitive facts are stripped at
the desk boundary, the output can help the owner study workflow shape,
but it cannot be treated as proof of real positions or balances.

flowchart TD
 subgraph D[Safe Mode portfolio desk]
 A[Local portfolio snapshot] --> B[Desk logic]
 B --> C[Sanitized output]
 end
 X[Private holdings, account numbers, transactions, balances] -. removed at the boundary .-> A
 C --> Y[Useful for research and workflow checks]
 C -. not a live holdings view .-> Z[Owner should not treat this as account truth]

 The diagram shows a local portfolio snapshot entering the Safe Mode
desk, where desk logic turns it into sanitized output. Private holdings,
account numbers, transactions, and balances are removed at that
boundary. The consequence is that the result is useful for research and
workflow checks, but it is not a live holdings view and should not be
treated as account truth.

 Figure: The verified runtime surface is desk-local,
so the owner should keep navigation claims scoped to each desk until a
shared front door is proven in live code.

flowchart TD
 A[Reviewed runtime] --> B[Desk-local service]
 A --> C[Shared front door]
 B --> D[Verified]
 C --> E[Still unproven]
 D --> F[Keep navigation claims at the desk level]
 E --> F

 The diagram starts with the reviewed runtime and splits it into two
paths: desk-local service surfaces that are verified, and a shared front
door that is still unproven. Both paths lead to the same consequence:
navigation claims should stay at the desk level until a shared entry
layer is actually proven.

 What Changes by Variation
Tier

 Tier progression at a glance

 The portfolio desk does not arrive as one fixed bundle of tools. It
expands cumulatively, so each variation is best read as a step up from
the previous one: the earlier tier stays in place, then the next tier
adds to it. That is the practical consequence for the owner. You do not
compare the tiers by asking whether they describe the same desk in
different words; you compare them by asking what new work becomes
possible at each step.

 Variation 
 Tools exported 
 What this tier adds 

 1 
 33 
 Baseline portfolio bundle. 

 2 
 42 
 Adds nine more tools on top of variation 1. 

 3 
 53 
 Adds eleven more tools on top of variation 2. 

 4 
 60 
 Adds seven watchlist, alert, and cross-pollinated tools, then
regenerates the exported tool-name list. 

 How to read the step-up

 The counts matter because they tell the owner that the desk is
packaged by variation, not by a single all-or-nothing release. Variation
1 already exports 33 tools, variation 2 raises that to 42, variation 3
raises it again to 53, and variation 4 reaches 60. The key operating
point is that the later tiers append to the earlier registry instead of
replacing it. In a concrete planning scenario, that means someone
checking variation 4 should not assume a variation 2-style tool surface
plus a few isolated extras; the later bundle carries forward the earlier
tools and then adds the watchlist, alert, and cross-pollinated layer on
top.

 Why the boundary still
matters

 This growth pattern sits inside a safe-mode portfolio package, not a
live holdings operating system. The reviewed evidence ties the package
to a local portfolio snapshot and the current variation implementations
that export the tools, so the owner should treat the desk as a bounded
research surface whose shape depends on which variation is being built
or inspected. That boundary matters because it limits what the counts
can prove: they show how much tool surface is present in the package,
but not live portfolio completeness, account freshness, or real-time
brokerage behavior. In other words, the desk is substantial, but it is
still a sanitized portfolio desk with a local snapshot behind it.

 Figure: The owner should compare tiers as additive
packages, not as alternative names for the same bundle; each later tier
carries the earlier base forward and adds more capability on top.

flowchart LR
 V1[Variation 1\n33 tools] --> V2[Variation 2\n42 tools]
 V1 --> V3[Variation 3\n53 tools]
 V1 --> V4[Variation 4\n60 tools]
 V2 --> A[Adds more tools to the earlier bundle]
 V3 --> B[Adds even more tools to the earlier bundle]
 V4 --> C[Adds watchlist and alert tools, then rebuilds the tool list]

 The diagram compares four variation tiers. Variation 1 starts with 33
tools. Variation 2 rises to 42 tools by adding more to the earlier
bundle. Variation 3 rises to 53 tools by adding even more on top of that
base. Variation 4 reaches 60 tools and adds watchlist and alert tools
before rebuilding the tool list. The consequence is that capability has
to be read tier by tier, because later tiers append to earlier ones
instead of replacing them.

 What the Evidence Clearly
Shows

 Safe Mode is stated
in more than one place

 The reviewed evidence does not leave Safe Mode to inference. The
top-level documentation, the coverage index, and the portfolio
validation policy all point to the same reading: this desk is running
with sanitized portfolio data, not with live holdings. That matters
because it turns Safe Mode from a loose label into a repeated condition
across separate sources. For an owner, the practical consequence is
simple: the desk should be read as a bounded research surface whose
outputs are meant to be inspected as mock or sanitized portfolio logic,
not as a statement of real account state.

 This repeated framing also sets the limit of what can be promised.
The evidence supports a safe, stripped-down portfolio representation,
but it does not establish a live portfolio service hiding underneath the
same wording. So if a user sees portfolio behavior in this desk, the
correct expectation is that it comes from the sanitized package the
repository describes, not from a proven production feed. A concrete
example is a portfolio summary that looks internally consistent inside
the desk but still cannot be taken as proof of a real brokerage account
or current market position.

 What was removed

 The same evidence is specific about what was taken out: private
holdings, account numbers, transactions, and balances. That is a
meaningful boundary because it tells the owner what kinds of claims the
desk can no longer make. Without those fields, the desk may still
support portfolio-shaped analysis or demonstrations, but it is no longer
carrying the personal financial facts that would make it a live holdings
system.

 The removal is not just cosmetic. Private holdings and balances are
the facts that would anchor ownership, exposure, and value at a specific
moment; account numbers and transactions are the identifiers and
activity trail that would connect the desk to a real account history.
Once those are removed, the desk can still show portfolio logic, but it
cannot be read as evidence of a real position ledger. For example, if an
analyst reviews a sample allocation or balance-like display, the owner
should treat it as a sanitized representation of portfolio behavior, not
as a verified account record that could be used for reconciliation.

 What the saved artifact
is bounded to

 The reviewed material also narrows the saved result. It is bounded to
the local portfolio snapshot plus the current variation implementations.
That means the exported artifact is not described as a free-floating,
live portfolio model that absorbs whatever external state exists at the
moment. It is tied to the snapshot the repository carries locally and to
the variation code that is currently in force.

 For the owner, this is the main operational constraint: if the
snapshot changes, or if the current variation set changes, the artifact
can change with it. The evidence does not establish a stronger guarantee
such as live synchronization, continuous refresh, or completeness beyond
the snapshot boundary. So the safest way to read the saved output is as
a desk-local package assembled from the repository’s present snapshot
and its active variation code. A practical example is a regenerated
portfolio export that reflects the current variation bundle even when
there is no proof that it matches a live upstream account state.

 The shared shell was not
verified

 The final boundary is navigation and runtime shape. The reviewed
runtime did not verify a shared shell or router, even though the
top-level docs still speak in the language of a unified cockpit and
manual. That gap matters because it separates document framing from
verified behavior. The docs suggest a single front door, but the live
evidence only confirms desk-local surfaces.

 So the owner should not treat the unified cockpit language as
established runtime fact in this chapter. At most, it is the shape
implied by the docs; the reviewed code did not confirm it. The
consequence is a conservative one: navigation should be understood at
the desk level until a shared shell is actually proven. If a reader
expects to move through one common interface across the workspace, the
evidence here does not support that claim yet. The correct verified
statement is narrower: this portfolio desk exists as a bounded,
sanitized desk surface, and the broader shared entry point remains
unconfirmed.

 What Is Solid Here

 Explicit tiering

 The strongest thing about the portfolio desk is that its packaging is
cumulative and visible. Variation 1 starts with 33 tools, and the later
steps rise to 42, 53, and 60 by adding on top of what came before rather
than swapping the whole bundle out. For an owner, that matters because
tier boundaries become something you can reason about directly: a larger
count is not just a bigger number, it is a signal that the desk has
acquired additional capability while retaining the earlier base. In a
review, that lets you compare two variations as related packages instead
of treating each one as a separate product.

 That clarity is valuable, but it has a boundary. The evidence
supports this staircase for the reviewed portfolio path; it does not
prove that every future variation will keep the same shape. What is
solid is the pattern already shown: the desk grows by explicit layering,
not by hidden replacement. If someone asks whether a higher tier still
contains the earlier desk logic, the reviewed packaging says yes for the
observed sequence. A lower tier should not be assumed to contain later
additions that only appear once the package has been expanded.

 Safe Mode is repeated, not
implied

 The safe-mode boundary is also unusually sturdy because it appears
across independent documents, not just one note. The root README, the
coverage index, and the validation policy all point to sanitized
portfolio data and a local snapshot. That repetition matters because it
turns “no live holdings” into a consistent reading rather than an
incidental label. For the owner, the consequence is simple: this desk
should be described as mock portfolio logic with removed holdings
details, not as a live account system.

 That is a strength because it lowers the risk of overclaiming. If a
support person or reviewer sees missing holdings fields, account
numbers, transactions, or balances, the reviewed evidence says those
omissions are part of the safe-mode posture, not proof that the desk is
incomplete or broken. The limit is equally important: this confidence
depends on the desk remaining in Safe Mode and on the sanitized snapshot
staying the reference point. If the desk moves out of that posture, this
reading has to be refreshed rather than carried forward unchanged.

 The live boundary is
desk-local

 The runtime boundary is defensible because what was actually verified
is desk-local. The reviewed live surfaces are desk-local SQLite
services, while the shared shell or router suggested by the top-level
docs was not verified. That gives the owner a practical floor: the
portfolio desk can be treated as a bounded, working surface on its own
terms even though the broader workspace wrapper remains unproven. In
other words, the evidence is strong enough to describe the portfolio
desk itself without pretending the entire product has been confirmed as
one unified shell.

 A concrete way this helps is in expectation-setting. If one desk
behaves normally while another desk is unavailable, the reviewed
evidence still supports the first desk as a local service path. What it
does not support is a claim that every desk must be passing through the
same live router behind the scenes. That distinction is useful because
it keeps the manual honest: the portfolio desk has a verified boundary,
but the wider shell behavior stays outside the proof until a live shared
router is actually found.

 Evidence Boundary

 Evidence boundary — Reviewed: - The top-level README
and coverage index that describe the portfolio desk and its safe-mode
posture. - The portfolio validation policy that bounds the saved
artifact and current variation implementations. - The portfolio
variations README and the variation 1 and variation 4 tool registries
that show cumulative tiering.

 Not reviewed: - A verified shared shell or router in live runtime
code. - Any deployed user interface outside the reviewed repository
evidence. - Real portfolio feeds, account state, freshness, or
production brokerage behavior. - Any broader runtime behavior beyond the
reviewed desk-local evidence.

 Recheck the portfolio docs if Safe Mode or the sanitized data story
changes. Inspect later variation tool registries to confirm whether the
cumulative counts still hold. Verify any shared router in live runtime
before widening navigation claims.

 Reviewed: blue-az/bt-inc-platform repository snapshot, Founder/owner
context

 Not reviewed: External runtime and integrations, Unreviewed runtime
and owner context

 Review
Appendix: Deduped Attention And Owner Decisions

 Resolved in this pass

 Synthetic/fiction boundary verified. The README says BT Inc. is
fictional, reflect-manual/NOTE.md says this repo is a
synthetic multi-domain conglomerate, and the generated manual preserves
that boundary instead of pretending the platform is one real production
shell.

 Portfolio Safe Mode boundary verified. The manual repeatedly says
portfolio outputs are sanitized/mock snapshot logic, not live holdings
or account truth.

 OSAT corrupt score history fail-open fixed. Corrupt or non-list
advisory score JSON no longer looks like empty score history; generation
and listing now block until the score history is inspected and repaired
or archived.

 OSAT tests now exercise the local BT Inc. implementation instead of
importing Project Phoenix’s external domains.xAmkor 
module.

 Things to know

 Shared navigation is not proven. Keep the manual desk-first until a
live shared router or shell is verified.

 Refresh is not atomic. A successful refresh can still represent
partial upstream coverage when individual pulls warn or fail.

 Empty score history is still an explicit empty state, not a
historical NO_GO. Corrupt score history is now blocked.

 Reviewer identity is still caller-supplied at the score write
boundary. Treat identity enforcement as an owner decision unless a
caller-auth layer is added.

 Medtech’s read-only analyst path does not prove every desk is
read-only; maintenance and refresh scripts can write.

 Portfolio variation tiers are cumulative and Safe Mode; do not read
higher tiers as live brokerage functionality.

 Open owner decisions

 Should navigation stay desk-local until a shared router is
proven?

 Should refresh success require complete upstream source coverage, or
is partial snapshot rebuild acceptable with explicit warnings?

 Should missing score history block advisory generation, or remain an
explicit unscored empty state?

 Where should reviewer identity be enforced before a score write is
accepted?

 Should portfolio remain permanently framed as sanitized mock logic,
or is there a future live-holdings mode that requires a separate
manual?